Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of South American Earth Sciences journal homepage www.elsevier.com locate jsames The challenging carbonates from the Pre-Salt reservoirs offshore Brazil facies, palaeoenvironment and diagenesis Ana C. Azere do a, b, , Lui s V. Duarte c, Alexandre P. Silva a, d a Universidade de Lisboa, Faculdade de Cie ncias, Departamento de Geologia, Lisboa, Portugal Instituto Dom Luiz IDL , Universidade de Lisboa, Faculdade de Cie ncias, Lisboa, Portugal c Universidade de Coimbra, MARE - Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Departamento de Cie ncias da Terra, Coimbra, Portugal d Universidade Federal Fluminense, Nitero i, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil b A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T Keywords Barra Velha Formation carbonates Santos Basin Brazil Depositional facies Diagenetic facies Palaeoenvironment Reservoir facies quality The Santos Basin in offshore Brazil belongs to the major carbonate reservoir province known informally as the Pre-Salt. A detailed analysis of cores, plugs, sidewall samples and thin-sections from two wells in a sector of this basin was undertaken, on an interval corresponding to the upper part of the Lower Cretaceous Barra Velha Formation. Several facies and subfacies types have been classified independently from existing terminologies for these carbonate rocks. The specific features of the studied material are discussed and comparison to other no menclatures is made. The facies include, namely laminated argillaceous limestones in-situ grown carbonates with a range of singular morphologies of debatable origin , from laminar crust, stromatolitic-like fabric to robust or delicate shrubby structures intraclastic grainstones packstones, whose clasts may be mostly remnants of shrubs or differ spherulitic grainstones packstones locally, oncoidal grainstones rudstones and packstones floatstones. These rocks are interpreted as depositional and diagenetic or essentially diagenetic facies. The latter are regarded as originally similar to some of the former ones but now disguised , because they were differently impacted by diagenesis processes over different time periods. Recognizing these effects is relevant, because they produce different reservoir facies characteristics and quality. The best potential reservoirs are some of the depositional and the mostly diagenetic facies. The palaeoenvironmental setting of the studied facies fits into a shallow, low-gradient lake. Charophyte and other possible, unidentified algae, albeit extremely rare, are documented for the first time. The facies pattern shows some cyclicity, suggestive of both water depth and chemistry changes. If the interpretations in this study are correct, they i reinforce existing datasets to improve understanding of these facies ii raise caution concerning some facies previously considered as separate depositional products, which in fact may instead result from diagenetic modifications iii stress the relevance of microfacies analysis and diagenetic petrography to help deciphering how diagenetic modifications impact on reservoir facies prop erties and quality and iv add new issues to the naming and textural classification problems of the Brazil PreSalt carbonates. 1. Introduction The Pre-Salt Lower Cretaceous succession of the South Atlantic Margin offshore Brazil hosts major hydrocarbon reserves. The giant carbonate reservoirs of these hydrocarbon habitats are one of the most important discoveries of recent times due to their exceptional econom ical value e.g. Carminatti et al., 2008 Carlotto et al., 2017 but, besides its oil hosting importance, have given birth to completely new perspectives because of their extraordinary sedimentary nature and characteristics. As a result, they have caused a huge scientific impact on carbonate sedimentology. In spite of the largely accepted overall depositional setting of non-marine, alkaline lacustrine conditions of these carbonate facies, the singularity and unknown nature of a range of textures, structures and morphologies, raised a whole new world of scientific questions, still under intense discussion e.g. Wright, 2011, 2012 Dorobek et al., 2012 Tosca and Wright, 2014, 2015 Wright and Corresponding author. Universidade de Lisboa, Faculdade de Cie ncias, Departamento de Geologia, Lisboa, Portugal. E-mail addresses acazeredo fc.ul.pt A.C. Azere do , lduarte dct.uc.pt L.V. Duarte , alexandrepportelasilva gmail.com A.P. Silva . https doi.org 10.1016 j.jsames.2021.103202 Received 3 August 2020 Received in revised form 30 December 2020 Accepted 4 February 2021 Available online 11 February 2021 0895-9811 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. A.C. Azere do et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 Barnett, 2014, 2015, 2017a,b, 2020 Ceraldi and Green, 2017 Wright and Rodri guez, 2018 Pietzsch et al., 2018 Farias et al., 2019 Gomes et al., 2020 . The uncertainties and conflicting theories root in the strong differences of the Pre-Salt carbonates from the previously known geological record and related environmental scenarios, and in the fact that their partial morphological resemblance with a few types of car bonate deposits like travertines, tuffs and microbialites is not accom panied by unequivocal evidence of their genetic nature and processes. The main points of doubt and debate are related with i biotic mi crobial versus abiotic genesis of the carbonates ii type of lake settings topographic-bathymetric configuration, hydro-geochemistry and palaeohydrology and their evolution over time iii carbonate rock classification and terminology iv genesis and significance of specific features, namely the spherulites and the Mg-rich clays that occur asso ciated with the carbonates. The Pre-Salt sequences from the African conjugate margin, namely in the offshore Kwanza Basin of Angola, have also recently been addressed in search for answers to some of these topics e.g. Saller et al., 2016 Ceraldi and Green, 2017 Teboul et al., 2017 . Due to confidentiality restrictions, until recently most of the pub lished information on the Brazil Pre-Salt, namely from Santos and Campos basins Fig. 1 , was almost only limited to conference pro ceedings, a situation that has gradually changed over the last few years. Most publications focus on one or more of the aforementioned issues e. g. Azere do et al., 2011 Wright, 2011, 2012, 2019 Tosca and Wright, 2014, 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2014, 2015, 2017a, b Muniz and Bosence, 2015 Hasiuk and Kaczmarek, 2015 Saller et al., 2016 Ceraldi and Green, 2017 Erthal et al., 2017 Faria et al., 2017 Herlinger et al., 2017 Pietzsch et al., 2018 Lima et al., 2019 . There have been much fewer approaches to detailed facies, microfacies, diagenesis and petro graphic documentation, with exceptions e.g. Terra et al., 2009 Muniz and Bosence, 2015 Rezende and Pope, 2015 Thompson et al., 2015 Herlinger et al., 2017 Azere do et al., 2018 Lima et al., 2019 Wright and Barnett, 2020 Gomes et al., 2020 , which means that rock-based criteria for understanding reservoir heterogeneity still warrants further study. This is precisely the focus of the present work, which addresses a high-resolution characterization of these unusual carbonate facies of the Lower Cretaceous Barra Velha Formation, based on recent studies of two cores from two wells in the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil Fig. 1 . This study is focused on core to microfacies analysis and diagenetic petrog raphy of material from those two wells however, the facies approach benefited from previous experience of the two first authors on other sectors of the same basin data that cannot be specified here because it is subjected to confidentiality and that already led them to raise the issues of problematic application of traditional nomenclature Azere do et al., 2011 . The specific aims of this work are to i present a detailed Fig. 1. Location and limits of the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil, South Atlantic western margin adapted from Rezende and Pope, 2015 . 2 A.C. Azere do et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 characterization of the facies and microfacies identified in this study ii add new issues to the naming and textural classification of these car bonate facies reinforcing the question of how to classify them iii stress the relevance of microfacies analysis and diagenetic petrography to help deciphering how diagenetic modifications impact on reservoir facies properties and quality iv contribute to palaeoenvironmental inter pretation of the facies, as far as the studied interval and sector concerns. 2. Geological setting The breakup of the western Gondwana Super-Continent and the opening of the South Atlantic Ocean developed diachronously from south to north over the Late Jurassic to Early Cretaceous as recorded in the southern American Continent e.g. Cainelli and Mohriak, 1999 Szatmari, 2000 Mohriak and Szatmari, 2008 Carlotto et al., 2017 . In both conjugate South Atlantic margins, offshore Brazil and offshore southwest Africa, vast basins developed, like the Santos Basin, as result of phases of extension during the pre-rift in the Late Hauterivian Early Barremian e.g. Karner and Gamboa, 2007 Chaboureau et al., 2013 . Rifting promoted the development of an extensive half-graben system, leading to continental basins, including interconnected lake systems, but periodically isolated during times of reduced lake-level as rifting pro ceeded from south to north, the initial set of many small lakes gave way to regional flexural subsidence, creating a widespread sag basin e.g. Carminatti et al., 2008 Chaboureau et al., 2013 Carlotto et al., 2017 Pietzsch et al., 2018 . In offshore Brazil basins and their counterparts in the African margin, the siliciclastic and carbonate successions that un derlay extensive evaporite units are currently named informally as Pre-Salt and are considered to range in age from Hauterivian to Aptian times. They are generally interpreted as having been deposited in lakes and associated terrestrial environments, namely fluvio-deltaic or allu vial fan systems, based on several lines of evidence e.g. Karner and Gamboa, 2007 Carminatti et al., 2008 Muniz and Bosence, 2015 Tavares et al., 2015 Thompson et al., 2015 Saller et al., 2016 . The biostratigraphic framework of these South Atlantic basins is mostly based on ostracod biozonation e.g. Poropat and Colin, 2012 . The western South Atlantic Pre-Salt Basin is 400 km wide at its southern edge Santos Basin Fig. 1 , narrowing towards NE Brazil to 100 km Sergipe-Alagoas Basin . In the southern part of the Brazilian proto-Atlantic margin initial rifting and subsidence are evidenced by intense basalt extrusion the subsequent phases of subsidence and sedi mentation are traditionally considered as defining three megasequences, overall similar in all the marginal basins of Brazil continental, transi tional and marine megasequences Cainelli and Mohriak, 1999 Moreira et al., 2007 Mohriak and Szatmari, 2008 Buckley et al., 2015 . Accordingly, the sedimentary infilling of the Santos Basin is usually divided into three super-sequences rift, post-rift often referred to as sag phase and drift super-sequences Fig. 2 . The timing of rifting or thermal sag is still being debated e.g. Ceraldi and Green, 2017 and references therein . The rift succession is essentially composed of con tinental siliciclastics, lacustrine coquinas forming important reservoir intervals e.g. Moreira et al., 2007 Carlotto et al., 2017 and organic-rich shales, corresponding to of the Pic arras and Itapema for mations. The late rift and post-rift sag sequence comprises lacustrine carbonates comprising the most prominent reservoirs e.g. Carminatti et al., 2008 Carlotto et al., 2017 and shales of the Barra Velha For mation, followed by the huge accumulation of evaporite deposits composing the Ariri Formation, which express the flooding of the basin by sea water Fig. 2 . The salt forms the effective regional seal for hy drocarbons hosted in underlying reservoirs. Above the salt, drift phase marine sediments developed as the region evolved into a passive-margin e.g. Cainelli and Mohriak, 1999 Mohriak and Szatmari, 2008 Car lotto et al., 2017 . The Santos Basin is located between latitudes of 23 and 28 S in the southeast portion of the Brazilian margin, being limited by the Cabo Frio and Florianopolis Highs, respectively Moreira et al., 2007 Carlotto Fig. 2. Regional chronostratigraphic, lithostratigraphic and geodynamic framework of the Lower Cretaceous of the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil based on Moreira et al., 2007, modified in Faria et al., 2017 Farias et al., 2019 Wright and Barnett, 2020 . et al., 2017 Fig. 1 . This basin encompasses about 350,000 km2, with water depths in excess of 3000 m. The reservoirs addressed in this study belong to the upper part of the Aptian Barra Velha Formation in the Santos Basin Fig. 2 . The Barra Velha unit lies within the traditional Brazilian Alagoas stage formation Moreira et al., 2007 and its thickness varies significantly across the basin, from over 500 to 55 m on fault blocks highs along which it may be locally absent e.g. Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2020 . It is bounded at its base by the Pre-Alagoas unconformity that separates it from the un derlying bivalve coquina-bearing units, is divisible by the intra-formational Intra-Alagoas unconformity and capped by the base of salt unconformity e.g. Moreira et al., 2007 Wright and Barnett, 2020 Gomes et al., 2020 . 3. Material and methods The studied material includes cores, plugs, sidewall samples and thin-sections from two wells Well-1 and Well-2 in a sector of Santos Basin, which correspond to the upper part of the Barra Velha Formation but at different intervals and geomorphic positions, thus it is not meaningful to correlate them directly. From Well-1 the core length is 14 m 68 m below the base of salt , from Well-2 the core length is 36 m 122 m below the base of salt . In addition to cores, 127 Well-1 and 101 Well-2 sidewall samples, 39 Well-1 and 143 Well-2 plugs and c.140 thin-sections in total were available for study. The material was analysed at CENPES-Petrobras in Rio de Janeiro Brazil , using con ventional hand lenses and 10 HCl acid for macroscale core observation and description, binocular microscope and Zeiss optical microscope with photographic camera for fast microscale analysis and description a coupled Axion Vision software was used for photo management. The set of photomicrographs are original data of the authors. The microfacies study was later improved through very detailed analysis of the thinsection photos, performed at the Faculdade de Cie ncias da Uni versidade de Lisboa FCUL . The in-site description of the cores and samples was also later revisited and improved at FCUL, with construc tion of systematic box by box sheets compiling core photos which cannot be shown here , lithologies and facies types as defined by this team , textures, porosity, evidence of diagenetic processes and other particular aspects colour codes were used for facies types and porosity degree, to enhance graphic clarity and ease analysis of the overall data along the wells an example of the description sheet and symbols used are shown in Fig. 3. 3 A.C. Azere do et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 Fig. 3. Representation of the standard description sheet created and used for the core analysis coupled with thin-section study only omitting here the alongside core photos, included in the original sheet and not shown here . The same colour code is kept in Figs. 10 and 14 of the present work. For colour in this figure, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. The porosity nomenclature follows Choquette and Pray 1970 and it is qualified based on visual estimation as follows 0 5 absent-low 5 10 moderate 10 15 high 15 excellent. be smooth or better marked, planar or crenulated, with crinckled argillaceous carbonate laminae particularly clear when affected by compaction Fig. 4 B locally, there is replacement by microcrystalline dolomite and microcrystalline silica. Locally, very small average 0.3 0.5 mm spherulites, organic matter seams and residual clayferruginous material occur. Very rarely, fluid-escape structures and possible bioturbation were recognized. Intercalated siliceous layers, nodules and irregular bands occur these may be wrapped around by crinckled argillaceous carbonate laminae due to compaction. According to published works e.g. Tosca and Wright, 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2015 2020 Farias et al., 2019 Gomes et al., 2020 clay minerals in the Barra Velha Formation are mostly Al-free Mg-phyllosilicate minerals namely stevensite no additional clay mineralogical data is available for the present study. This facies F1 was identified only in Well-2, whose core intervals corresponding to F1 range between a few centimetres to c. metre, more commonly 30 40 cm, with sharp limits regarding the under- and over laying facies clearly seen even at macroscopic scale. Porosity in this facies is absent to very low, the latter case corresponding to very rare unconnected channels and micro-vugs. This facies is closely equivalent to the laminated carbonate mud stones labelled as F3 by Wright and Barnett 2017a, 2020 and, in the classification scheme of Gomes et al. 2020 that considers a single broad group of mudstones with additional adjectives to express variations, it would fall mostly into their Mg-clay mudstones, locally in the smooth 4. Facies and porosity In the studied wells, all the cored units are of carbonate nature, corresponding, in broad terms, to limestones, dolomitic limestones dolostones and argillaceous limestones these carbonate rocks may be silicified and or bear silica nodules and layers. The detailed macro- and microscale analysis allowed distinguishing six main facies types F1 F6, excluding totally crystalline dolomitic limestones dolostones plus six subtypes F2A, F2B, F2BT, F2B2, lacy F2B, F2B quasi-F3 , which are described in detail below and illustrated in Figs. 4 12. The petrographic characteristics, crucial to fine-tuning facies diagnosis and contrasts among them, encompass compositional, textural and porosity features, so these aspects will be described together for each facies. 4.1. Facies 1 F1 argillaceous limestone with incipient to marked lamination Argillaceous limestones with incipient to marked sub-millimetric lamination, whose laminae are mostly silty-clayey material Fig. 4 A . The argillaceous material locally shows a green colour and its content varies on a visual estimation from significant to minor. The laminae may 4 A.C. Azere do et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 Fig. 4. Argillaceous limestone with incipient to marked lamination, defined as facies 1 F1 in this work A and B the latter shows compaction effects. Different aspects of the laminar carbonates composing facies 2 F2A of this work C to E C Platy laminae, clotted layers and spherulites Fe, BP and Fr porosities are present. D Highly porous F2A, with a few coated spherulites and, in lower part of the photo, a little of the shrubby facies, F2B. E Wavy and planar laminated structure, small spherulites and silicified zones low BP porosity. F Alternation between F2A non-porous dark, clayey bands and F2B strongly affected by dissolution . For colour in this figure, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. wavy laminated dolo- or calcimudstones. Vertebrate remains have been reported in these lithologies from the Barra Velha Formation e.g. Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2017a , but none was found in the studied similar facies of this work. 4.2. Facies 2 F2 in-situ grown carbonates with a range of singular morphologies Limestones and locally dolomitic limestones dominantly formed by 5 A.C. Azere do et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 in-situ formed grown and or bounded structures, with a range of spe cific singular morphologies, including two dominant fabrics laminar to stromatolitic-like and shrubby fabrics. This F2 is in fact rather varied, justifying its subdivision into sub-types as made here however, it is considered useful to associate the several subtypes into a broad generic group with a common linking name, due to their overall usual affinity, namely apparent in situ formation regardless of the possible mecha nisms involved and the common very close association of their occur rence. The subtypes are designated F2A and F2B, the latter also including subtypes F2BT, F2B2, lacy F2B and F2B quasi-F3 , char acterized as follows. 4.2.1. F2A It is clearly laminated, defined by planar, wavy or crenulated laminae Fig. 4 C to E , including stromatolitic-like fabric, and locally shows fenestrae and pseudo-fenestrae structures very rare normal to bedding micro-cracks resembling desiccation cracks occur. It may have minor clay component, sparse argillaceous micrite matrix, interbedded clotted or micropeloidal laminations and scattered small spherulites 0.12 0.95 mm, most commonly 0.4 0.5 mm Fig. 4 C F. This facies contains very rare ostracods or ostracod moulds Fig. 5 A and, in one single level, a charophyte gyrogonite was identified, plus minor, possible but not unclear charophyte fragments Fig. 5 B . F2A exhibits a tabular to smoothly undulated macromorphology, often resembling morphologically microbial crusts or mats, but microbial nature is not implied or denied here. F2A may occur as successive, well developed crust-like layers Fig. 4C E for decimetres to metres along the cores or interbedded with other facies, usually F2B Fig. 4 F , or on the contrary be reduced to just very thin, highly porous and sometimes discontinuous interstitial bands or ribbons within other facies framework, mainly in F2B Fig. 6 A , being one of the most abundant, together with F2B and F3 in both cores. Porosity is variable in F2A, from low to high, more commonly moderate-high, including fenestral, channel and vuggy pore types Fig. 4 C F . In the sense that F2A is here described as bearing some resemblance with laminar microbial facies, it would be included in the microbial facies group F4 of Wright and Barnett 2017a, 2020 . In the classifi cation of Gomes et al. 2020 , there is no clear match for F2A of this work, except when including clotted or micropeloidal laminations or scattered spherulites, in which cases terms like laminated spherulitic mudstone could closely apply. 4.2.2. F2B This is an abundant facies, composed of rather peculiar carbonate structures generally named shrubs Figs. 6 A-F, 7 A and B . These rocks have shrubby morphologies formed by columnar, tree-shaped, fingershaped structures, most commonly branched, with rarer rounded single pieces. These structures may show differently sized and very clearly defined to somewhat more irregular arrangements all encompassed by the general term F2B , but typically exhibit exuberant robust, ramified, well developed and preserved framework, where growths are often suggestive of resulting from more than one growth phase, to form composite shrubs up to a few centimetres high subtype F2BT, T meaning typical Fig. 6 B E . The shrubs are composed of densely arranged fibrous to bladed calcite crystals, whose dominant patterns are clearly radiating but more poorly defined, filamentous crystal masses occur. The polycrystal clus ters may form small fans side by side and superimposed, or crusts made of parallel crystals with longer axis perpendicular to crust limits, overall usually composing several vertically stacked bands perpendicular to structure growth axis, though more individualized, rounded elements or grains occur. The individual bands average 0.2 0.33 mm thick, are often markedly curved but may be almost horizontal and are separated by darker lines made of micro to cryptocrystalline carbonate Figs. 6 B, C, E and F and 7 B . Locally, patterns resembling radiaxial and fascicular-optic calcite were observed. Dark brown coatings of the Fig. 5. Very rare fossil occurrences in thin-sections of the studied facies A Tiny ostracod carapaces in F2A, scattered throughout the field of view but particularly concentrated in the upper arrowed band the arrow points to other possible, but dubious fossil fragment algae . B Very rare finding of un equivocal charophyte gyrogonite arrow , in F2A. C Possible shell fragments lower left zone and unidentified structures resembling algae , more clear in the middle and upper part of the image, mixed with shrub material. 6 A.C. Azere do et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 Fig. 6. In-situ grown shrubby facies, F2B A Shrubs F2B with interstitial laminar facies F2A . B Well defined branched shrubs with high inter-shrub porosity in the lower half of the structures and less so upwards. C Robust, large and well-preserved shrubs, partially outlined by crypto-micro calcite crystals and including micritic residual bridges. D Robust, large and well-preserved shrubs, where inter-shrub space is either partially void with minor micritic residual material, or partially filled with microcrystalline calcite and dolomite. E Broken shrubs, showing common dark lines separating shrub growth bands moderate to high porosity. F Example of shrubs exhibiting more tabular than branching development, associated with F3 dolomite rhombs as cement and or pore-filling material. For colour in this figure, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. 7 A.C. Azere do et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 Fig. 7. Examples of different facies and subtypes and their common associations A Very small shrubs with preferential alignment defining the facies subtype F2B2. B Example of close association between F2B shrubs and apparently grainstone dominantly made of shrub clasts see text for explanation , termed facies 3 F3, lower part of the photo shrubs grow upwards from the grainier substrate below whereas F3 voids are occluded by cement, F2B is porous. C and D Typical examples of the highly porous facies interpreted as strongly dissolved shrubby structure, leading to the diagenetic variety here named lacy F2B, interpreted as a very delicate residual morphology of shrub outlines and branching ghost framework see also Fig. 12 C and text for explanation. E and F Microscale transition from F2B to F3, a feature very commonly observed in the studied material, where F3 granular nature is not obvious compare to Figs. 8 E and 9 A and B . For colour in this figure, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. 8 A.C. Azere do et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 Fig. 8. Examples of petrographic evidence of some diagenetic processes A Corroded shrubs F2B , with interstitial dolomite micro-rhombs, in direct contact with a silicified zone totally occluded. B Associated F2B and F3, only the latter is cemented. C Dolomitized shrubs F2B , with dolomite also seeming to replace a first generation of circum-granular bladed cement arrowed . D Highly corroded and dolomitized F2B, with clear bridges of residual laminar material with rhombs. E Typical clearer granular fabric of F3 see also text . F Contrasting with most previous examples, this shows tightly packed, amalgamated shrubs F2B . For colour in this figure, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. 9 A.C. Azere do et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 Fig. 9. Different aspects of facies 3 to 6 of this work A and B Examples of F3 intraclastic grainstones packstones whose clasts are mostly F2B remnants where the grain-dominated fabric is clearer compare to Fig. 7 E and F A shows dolomitic cement and low porosity, B shows higher BP porosity. C and D Spherulitic grainstones of F4, silicified and including coated spherulites C . E Facies 5 F5 , intraclastic grainstone-packstone, commonly with dark clasts as in this example, non-porous except rare post-silica intercrystal porosity . F Facies 6 F6 , oncoidal grainstone rudstone, in this example silicified sparse WP porosity. For colour in this figure, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. 10 A.C. Azere do et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 external outline or of the elemental branches and pieces of the shrubs occur, possibly clayey micrite or microbial material. Very locally and rare, possible shell fragments and unidentified structures resembling algae were detected together in the same thin-section, mixed with shrub material Fig. 5 C . The shrub intervals, as a whole, occur predominantly as horizontal layers, very locally they make a domal shaped structure. It is common to find F2A as interstitial material within the main F2B framework Fig. 6 A . More rarely, this F2B is composed of very small less than 2 mm high shrubs, here called micro-shrubs , corresponding to the F2B2 sub-type. These very small shrubs form regular layers a few millimetres thick, which occur interbedded with F2B and F2A and usually show a regular, preferentially bedding-parallel, tight arrangement Fig. 7 A . Both F2B and F2B2 may include small spherulites, spherulitic coatings, micritic coatings and, very rarely, small ostracods or ostracod moulds. Another subtype of the F2B facies is here created for very delicate, finely structured, highly porous textures lacy aspect named lacy F2B Fig. 7 C and D , with poor element definition at core scale exami nation, but in which at microscale a ghost framework texture is recognizable. This suggests it to be a residual texture from an originally connected framework, that is, a structured, non-random morphology resembling the outlines and branching of shrubs Fig. 7 C and D . Therefore, this textural type is here interpreted as remnant of F2B and, accordingly, included as a subtype in F2B. Other cases show similarly highly porous, some still inter-connected structures mixed with partially broken, collapsed fragments of the shrubby material, acquiring an aspect closer to grain-dominated car bonates these examples are interpreted here as having closer textural affinity with the next described facies type F3 , thus being named F2B quasi-F3 Fig. 7 E and F . In fact, a transitional suite from F2B to lacy F2B to quasi-F3 and F3 is recognized see also F3 , as discussed in 7. Diagenesis. The inter-shrub space is commonly totally or partially void when occluded, calcite or dolomite more common occur as crystalline ce ments, pore linings and infillings, sometimes also argillaceous and micrite material, interstitial laminae of F2A or, rarely, siliceous matter Figs. 6 A, C and D, 8 A and C . It is particular noteworthy that dolomite in the inter-shrub space occurs commonly as apparently floating rhombs, either scattered or in clusters, or only linked by very thin, tiny bridges Fig. 8 A and D . There are pores within the shrub structures themselves, which, depending on the growth development and preser vation stage of the shrubs, may appear as growth-framework, vugs, inter- and intra-particle pores Figs. 6 A, C and D, 7 B in the case of the dolomite masses, inter-crystalline porosity may occur also Fig. 8 A and C . Overall, F2B commonly exhibits high porosity, that may be even excellent especially F2BT, lacy F2B and F2B quasi-F3 , but some times moderate and rarely low porosity are also recorded in F2B amal gamated arrangements Fig. 8 F and in F2B2. The pore-system network differs between F2BT and lacy F2B, with usually larger size pores in F2BT and higher tortuosity in lacy F2B Fig. 7 C and D . The small, well sorted shrubs of F2B2 usually form a tighter, lower porosity texture, but the straighter channel pores may potentially enhance permeability Fig. 7 A . It is notable that all the types of F2B may have interbedded siliceous layers, irregular bands or nodules Fig. 8 A , as well as recrystallization zones visible at macroscale. F2B except for F2B2 is one the most abundant in the two studied cores and typically occurs successively for several metres, though thinner intervals and intercalations of other facies are common, namely of the next described F3 Figs. 6 F, 7 B, 8 B . The textural classification of these facies and subtypes is problem atic, due to the uncertainty on their genetic process Azere do et al., 2011, 2018 see also 5. Palaeoenvironmental interpretation and 8. Dis cussion . If dominant microbial origin is accepted, they would fit into the boundstone definition, but if the abiotic hypotheses are favoured then they are developed in-situ but not organically made. In the latter case they could be referred as pseudo-boundstones or precipitated boundstones following Della Porta 2015 , or cementstones following Wright 1992 . More specific comparison may be made with the ter minologies recently proposed for the Barra Velha carbonate facies the F2B of this work is roughly equivalent to the F1 F1a either with inter-shrub Mg-silicate matrix or porous, respectively of Wright and Barnett 2017a, 2020 , and fit well into the term shrubstones coined by Gomes et al. 2020 . 4.3. Facies 3 F3 intraclastic grainstones packstones whose clasts are mostly F2B remnants These limestones apparently exhibit a grain-supported textural appearance, corresponding to intraclastic grainstones packstones more rarely, rudstones floatstones , but with a special characteristic the term apparently is used deliberately to stress the interpretative classifica tion the clasts are mostly F2B collapsed structures and remains that is, apparently having disaggregated into pieces in-situ or almost , with no or just incipient reworking Figs. 7 B, E and F, 8 B and E, 9 A and B a few more clearly reworked grains occur. This rock type is regarded as an essentially diagenetic texture, with minor depositional contribution, so to be classified as mainly diagenetic, not depositional grainstones mostly or packstones see 7. Diagenesis and 8. Discussion . However, for simplicity concerning the general characterization of these microf acies, we use the classical textural terms of Dunham 1962 and Embry and Klovan 1971 . These carbonates may exhibit a variable range of particles from dominant differently sized more usually medium-grained fragments of F2B structures as said, here interpreted as mostly in-situ , commonly interlinked locally exhibiting a more amalgamated arrangement, likely due to slight compaction , to less common well defined intraclasts, locally dark, coated grains, a few oncoids elements with a few oncoidal coating layers, spherulites and peloids Fig. 9 A and B . There may be an inter-granular crystalline cement often dolomitic , locally micrite or silica. This set of elements makes up a more granular fabric Fig. 9 A and B , but most commonly the fragments arrangement and their interconnection are strongly suggestive of a previous organized struc ture and morphology, thus an originally non-granular fabric for which the currently observed one would be a remnant ghost Figs. 7 E and F, 8 E - interpreted as having textural affinity with the previously described facies subtype F2B quasi-F3 , as said. Very rarely, a very faint lami nation is observed. Siliceous layers, irregular bands or nodules, as well as pervasively recrystallized zones commonly with irregular outlines, visible at macroscale, may occur Fig. 8 B . In similarity to F2B, this facies may occur successively for several metres, though thinner intervals and in tercalations of other facies are common and next to F2A and F2B is the most abundant in both cores. This F3 commonly exhibits high to excellent porosity, but in some cases low moderate pore development occurs. No exact match between this facies and those typified by previous authors is recognized. The best resemblance would be cases named as spherulitic shrubstone and shrubby spherulitstone by Gomes et al. 2020 , but in the studied cases only sometimes the particles are spherulites, as described. More often the clasts are clearly simply shrub fragments, locally coated but mostly exhibiting no or incipient reworking and almost in-situ redeposition. The F5 of Wright and Barnett 2017a, 2020 , in particular as detailed in Barnett et al. 2018 , corre sponds also to grainstones and rudstones, comprising fragments of crystal shrubs, spherulites, intraclasts and, in some cases, peloids and volcanic fragments one of their subtypes is dominantly composed of intraclasts of re-worked crystal shrubs, mainly coarse- to very coarse-grained up to pebble-grade, with planar to low-angle lamination and, very rarely, cross-lamination. The clear reworked character of the shrub clasts, the very coarse-grained size, no preserved or perceived previous connection among shrub fragments and clear lamination, 11 A.C. Azere do et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 including cross-lamination, differ from the facies defined here. crystal shrubs, spherulites, intraclasts and, in some cases, peloids and volcanic fragments, the studied examples differing in the dominant fineto medium grained size and absence of volcanic clasts the latter were recognized in previous studies of the authors in similar facies from other sectors and intervals of the basin succession . For similar cases, Gomes et al. 2020 apply the traditional textural nomenclature of Dunham 1962 , as in this work. 4.4. Facies 4 F4 spherulitic grainstones packstones Spherulitic grainstones and packstones, whose grains are exclusively or dominantly spherulites Fig. 9 C and D , in clear contrast with the scattered occurrence of spherulites among other components in the other facies. The spherulites, also been referred to as fibro-radial spherulitic polycrystals or spherules Chafetz et al., 2018 , are rounded elements made by a radiating array of calcite crystals, with sweeping extinction and typical pleochroic rosettes in the studied cores, they range from 0.12 mm to 1.2 mm in diametre, though previous au thors report larger size ranges - for instance, commonly less than 2 mm but reaching c.15 mm Terra et al., 2009 Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2020 and from 0.1 to 4 mm Gomes et al., 2020 . The spherulites are often silicified Fig. 9 C and D , less frequently dolomitized or recrys tallized and some spherulitic grains show a component similar to a shrub but with a fascicular-optic calcite aspect more rarely, they may be coated Fig. 9 C . The bounding material is microcrystalline calcite, dolomite or silica chalcedony or microcrystalline quartz . Porosity in F4 is absent to locally low. F4 is present only in Well-2, along centimetre to decimetre thick intervals, almost always with sharp boundaries to under- and overlaying facies. This facies type is equivalent to the F2a of Wright and Barnett 2017a, 2020 and to the spherulitestone of Gomes et al. 2020 . In contrast with other sectors of Santos Basin, differentiated spherulitic grainstones and packstones are not so much common as to make this F4 one of the predominant facies, though spherulitic particles within several of the other facies are common, as described. The facies here labelled F6 contrasts with the remainder facies types in having oncoidal material as dominant allochems, thus corresponds to oncoidal-rich grainstones rudstones and packstones floatstones. It in cludes well defined, individualized oncoids, oncoidal coated fragments and aggregates, with associated intraclasts Fig. 9 F .The oncoidal par ticles range from less than 0.5 mm to more than 3.5 mm, with the in ternal concentric laminar structure clearly to moderately developed, though frequently affected by intraparticle dissolution this may be so strong locally as to result in almost mouldic porosity, where the original oncoidal nature is recognizable because of the coexistence with better preserved oncoids Fig. 11 C . The bounding material may be micrite and or crystalline dolomitic cement, locally calcite with gravitational morphology and siliceous cement. Porosity in this facies is low to moderate, made by mostly intra granular pores but unconnected. This facies type F6 only occurs at a few intervals in Well-1. Wright and Barnett 2017a, 2020 included oncolite bearing car bonates in their microbial facies F4. 4.5. Facies 5 F5 intraclastic grainstones and packstones 5. Palaeoenvironmental interpretation Intraclastic grainstones and packstones locally rudstones with heterogeneous textural arrangement Fig. 9 E , most usually showing a massive packing with little cement, but locally showing grains more loosely distributed in larger cement amount see also 7. Diagenesis and Fig. 11 A and B . These limestones are characterized by the common presence of dark grains whereas in F3 they are rare , besides the more common intraclasts the clasts are of various sizes, but more commonly fine- to medium-grained and moderately sorted, rounded subrounded to subangular, overall defining clear evidence of reworking. Among the intraclasts, some are similar to F3 elements remnants of shrubs but with a more worn and reworked aspect, as evidenced by abraded poorly preserved structure of the particles, some with irregular outlines, and the scattered distribution no inter-linked pieces as in F3 a few intra clasts may exhibit a thin dark coating, likely of micrite clayey micrite. Besides intraclasts, peloids are also found. Very rarely, a faint graded lamination is observed. Argillaceous matrix material and siliceous nodules may occur. The bounding material is of carbonate or siliceous nature. The presence of cement or cement plus matrix among the grains is another difference to F3, which is typically highly porous with no or only bridges of interstitial material. The silica ranges from crypto- to mesocrystalline and in some cases it is not possible to be sure whether it was precipitated as siliceous cement or resulted from silicification of previous carbonate cement. In other cases, a clear difference is seen in size and morphology between crystals surrounding the grains and crystals in remaining intergranular space, suggesting that there was at least a precursor circum-granular cement, later silicified this inference is reinforced by the occurrence of similar microcrystalline silica infilling local intragranular porosity. Porosity in F5 is low to inexistent. F5 intervals in the studied cores range from centimetre to 0.50 0.60 m thick, almost always with sharp boundaries to under- and overlaying facies. This facies type basically compares with F5 of Wright and Barnett 2017a, 2020 , more detailed in Barnett et al. 2018 , namely their grainstones and rudstones comprising clearly reworked fragments of The palaeoenvironmental interpretation of the Pre-Salt carbonate facies is rather difficult, due to the uncertainties of present knowledge concerning the genesis of these deposits and the extensive amount of data confidentiality. It is fairly clear that they were originated in nonmarine depositional settings, basically in alkaline lakes with variable salinity the lack of marine fossils and of marine evaporite minerals is consistent with this scenario e.g. Moreira et al., 2007 Carminatti et al., 2008 Wright, 2012 Tosca and Wright, 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2015 . Recent isotope geochemistry studies yielded results supporting freshwater to evaporitic lacustrine palaeoenvironments Pietzsch et al., 2018 . At certain sectors, namely in the Campos Basin, besides lakes there would be peri-lacustrine transitional settings with terrigenous fluvio-deltaic or alluvial fan systems Muniz and Bosence, 2015 Tavares et al., 2015 . However, in detail there are many doubts and different ideas have been discussed regarding lake styles and features topographic-bathy metric configuration, water depth, hydro-geochemistry, geometry , with two main end-member conflicting models i deeper lakes with differentiated microbial platforms of hundred meters relief and smaller buildups Buckley et al., 2015 ii very shallow, evaporitic, hyper-alkaline lakes with predominantly abiotic carbonate and Mg-silicate precipitate Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2017b Wright and Rodriguez, 2018 Farias et al., 2019 . The latter model assumes that the km scale vertical relief now separating some intervals reflect significant post-depositional, but pre-salt structuration, largely due to post and some syn Barra Velha faulting and erosion Karner and Gamboa, 2007 Wright and Barnett, 2017b, 2020 Wright, 2019 . Recently, some possible variations and alternatives to those models were added by Pietzsch et al. 2018 and Gomes et al. 2020 . Considering the huge dimensions of the Santos Basin, it is likely that different sub-basins with diverse configurations and environmental scenarios could have coexisted or succeeded each other, depending on conditions developed on separate sectors and or their syn- or postdepositional structuration. The authors studies confidential in other 4.6. Facies 6 F6 oncoidal grainstones rudstones and packstones floatstones 12 A.C. Azere do et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 sectors and intervals of the basin succession, reinforce this idea. The debate on palaeonvironmental setting and evolution of these carbonates can only be seriously approached with wide and multidisciplinary dataset at the regional scale, which is not the case of this study. Therefore, the palaeonvironmental interpretations made here are not intended to discuss previous wider-scale models, but only to better constrain each of the studied facies, thus it is necessarily limited to the restricted sector and interval represented by the examined cores. A crucial factor casting doubt on inferring the depositional conditions is the general lack of unequivocal palaeo-depth markers, with very rare exceptions. poor fossil record indicates highly unusual, life inhibiting environmental conditions, namely too high alkalinity. Exceptions would be possible microbial communities, if these were at least partially responsible for the stromatolitic-like layers and clotted laminae, but this remains questionable as wider data was not available for this study. In the Barra Velha unit over the basin, there has been also little unequivocal evidence for microbial presence Wright, 2012, 2019 Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2020 . Similar facies in Campos Basin was reported to show microbial structures Muniz and Bosence, 2015 . The very rare, small-sized 1 mm in length ostracods occur as smooth carapaces or their moulds, not loose valves, indicating autochthony in agreement with these obser vations, previous authors have referred to ostracods being present in the Santos Pre-Salt carbonates with forms of a wide salinity tolerance and appearing to be non-marine e.g. Wright and Barnett, 2015 . It is important to highlight the recognition in the present study of a char ophyte gyrogonite Fig. 5 B , plus rare submillimetric fragments possibly also belonging to charophytes, but not that unequivocal. Even being a very rare finding, it is significant here to the authors knowledge, it is the first clear documentation in the Brazilian Pre-Salt carbonates of this group of benthic green algae, typically inhabiting upper photic zone of fresh to brackish, very locally saline waters. The reason for the extreme paucity of their record in the Barra Velha Formation is not clear, but a combination of possible causes may be speculated i it is known that a few charophytes can survive in higher salinity conditions, as docu mented for instance in the margins of saline coastal lakes of Australia fed by groundwaters of varying salinities Burne et al., 1980 , but germi nation of fertilized oogonia apparently requires lower salinities. Thus, the fact that in the Pre-Salt lakes the trend was of common periods and general evolution towards increasing salinity e.g. Ceraldi and Green, 2017 Pietzsch et al., 2018 , would not favour proliferation and survival of a charophyte flora ii another likely cause could be lack of calcium carbonate bioavailability for algae calcification, considering the strong consumption required for the huge shrub development. Overall, the data attests for very shallow, restricted, low-energy, strongly alkaline and probably episodically saline lake setting. In these unusual geochemical conditions, there could be generation and accu mulation of the reported Mg-rich clayey material previously discussed , which is often observed in association with the F2A laminations. Therefore, as it is here interpreted, this F2A would represent the typical carbonate facies on the marginal-lacustrine zones, developed laterally to other facies formed in slightly deeper water column, namely the F2B, and or in periods during which the lake waters would become less supersaturated in calcium carbonate as compared to those favouring the exuberant development of the F2B shrubby structures see below . The examples of laminated microbialites from Campos Basin were interpreted to be more marginal marine depositional systems Muniz and Bosence, 2015 . 5.1. Facies 1 F1 These argillaceous limestones are assigned to low energy deposi tional conditions, under a moderately deep water-column deeper than that of the other facies defined in this study, though not very deep , with some fine-grained terrigenous supply. These conditions are deduced from the fine-grained nature of the sediments, mixture of carbonate and argillaceous material, presence of some organic matter, lack of reworking suggesting no bottom currents and weak water circulation the general absence of significant mass-flow resedimentation events and only very locally syn-sedimentary deformation signs imply negligible slopes and weak steep gradients, and interbedding with shallower water facies with no signs of irregular contacts or erosion is consistent with the envisaged scenario. In addition, the fact that the main clay minerals present in the Barra Velha Formation are Al-free Mg-silicate minerals Tosca and Wright, 2015 suggests, according to Gomes et al. 2020 , that they were pre served in sub-littoral but not too deep zones, where Mg-clays would dissolve. The generation of authigenic Mg-clay minerals, in alkaline and saline lacustrine environments is well documented, with stevensite being reported to form in highly alkaline lake waters of pH 9 Khoury et al., 1982 Jones, 1986 Calvo et al., 1999 Tosca and Wright, 2015 Saller et al., 2016 . It remains a matter of discussion if they are the likely product of biotically bacterially mediated precipitation, of precipita tion driven by abiotic process such as evaporation , or both e.g. Tosca and Wright, 2015 Perri et al., 2018 Gomes et al., 2020 . Deposition of this facies could be related to meteoric water flooding events, increasing lake water level and diluting freshening the water, thus promoting hydrochemistry changes, albeit minor, towards slightly decreased alkalinity but remaining alkaline and lower salinity, which would be less favourable to most intense carbonate precipitation as those origi nating the F2. The presence of pre-compaction silica nodules in this facies is also consistent with freshening of lake waters, as pointed by Wright and Barnett 2020 , as silica precipitation is favoured by a lowering of alkalinity. However, the interpretation here requires further evidence, as it is also possible to admit other situations, like changes in precipitation-evaporation linked to arid-semiarid-humid climate modes or variable detrital influx from the hinterland see for instance Wright and Barnett, 2015 Gomes et al., 2020 . 5.3. Facies 2B F2B The robust, ramified and well developed shrub framework, with growths composed of successive, stacked bands of densely arranged calcite crystals perpendicular to structure growth axis, implies in-situ formation. The strong, often exuberant development of these shrub structures, vertically continuous and laterally linked, without or only very locally showing erosion or top truncation and with no evidence of subaerial exposure, further supports in-situ growth under persistent subaquatic conditions. The terrigenous supply would be minimal and discontinuous during F2B formation. The water column would be oxygenated, shallow but slightly deeper than as for F2A, with persistent calcium carbonate oversaturation and very high alkalinity allowing such high carbonate productivity and preservation, likely highly saline due to the high ion concentration. According to Saller et al. 2016 , calcite composing similar shrub structures of Kwanza Basin in the conjugate west-African margin has high strontium concentrations average 3000 ppm , which is explained by the authors as related to generally high 5.2. Facies 2A F2A The dominant tabular morphology of these carbonate layers, with laminar macro- to microstructure that may vary from planar to wavy, but bedding parallel, also when interstitial among F2B, suggest prefer ential lateral development over vertical growth and accumulation, like in mats, under a very shallow water column. There is common fenestral and pseudo-fenestral porosity, the former supporting the inference for very shallow setting, with intermittent emersion events very locally, sparse micro-cracks resembling desiccation cracks occur, which would also imply rare short subaerial exposure. Besides the abiotic or biotic processes that may have assisted in carbonate origin, the minor occur rence of interstitial muddy material, likely micrite with clay matrix cement, indicates low-energy depositional conditions. The dramatically 13 A.C. Azere do et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 strontium concentrations in highly saline and alkaline lake water. The salinity and high alkalinity conditions strongly inhibits or totally pre vents metazoan life Konhauser, 2006 Wright and Barnett, 2020 , explaining the striking lack of fossil record in these carbonates locally, very rare ostracods, similar to those in F2A . The common association of F2A laminae with the shrubs F2B, F2BT , either interstitial among the main framework or as lenses bands, suggests spatial proximity between these facies, hence common gradual transitions and small-scale interwoven between them. This corroborates the inference that their depositional settings would not be much different as regards location within the lake system, although with deeper water column higher available space for subaquatic aggrada tion in the case of F2B F2BT comparing to F2A. The micro-shrubs of F2B2 are possibly an exception, as their side-by-side alignment forming thin layers may reflect also a reduced water depth or, alternatively, markedly decreased calcite supersaturation and or changes in abun dance of components due to variations in lake water chemistry inde pendent of water-depth variations e.g. Wright, 2011, 2012 Mercedes-Marti n et al., 2019 . within Mg Si matrices Dorobek et al., 2012 , or as crystal growth in the presence of specific organic compounds Mercedes-Marti n et al., 2016 Kirkham and Tucker 2018 admitted that microbial activity may initiate spherulite formation, but the crystal growth itself be abiotic. Tutolo and Tosca 2018 , based on experimental work and geochemical modelling suggested that although solutions supersaturated with respect to Mg-silicate commonly produce hydrated gels, neither elevated con centration of organic acids, nor biological mediation, nor a gel matrix are required for calcium carbonate to attain a spherulitic morphology. However, Wright and Barnett 2020 point out that spherulites are commonly re-worked and yet re-worked Mg-silicate clay fragments are exceedingly rare in the Barra Velha Formation successions, and suggest as the most likely explanation that spherulites would have been re-worked when still in a gel matrix which were then dispersed into the water column and re-dissolved. Where not re-worked, during shallow burial, dehydration of the Mg-silicate gel would trigger formation of Mg-silicates such as stevensite e.g. Tosca and Wright, 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2020 . In the present study, as mentioned, F4 is not common, unlike in other intervals of Santos Basin. It was recognized only in Well-2, with sharp boundaries to under- and overlaying facies. It is notable that these spherulitic grainstones packstones are usually strongly cemented by microcrystalline calcite, dolomite or silica, but only locally compaction features were recognized concave-convex contacts, stylolytes . They are often pervasively silicified. More rarely, coated spherulites occur Fig. 9 C , suggesting shallow water deposition. The overall conclusion only concerning the studied dataset is that spherulite accumulation and or possibly further growth, with no other loose particles in-between, only cement, generating the spherulitic grainstones of F4, may have dominantly occurred in somewhat different geochemical conditions relative to the other facies. The existence of spherulites interspersed in the other facies namely in F2A, here assumed to be deposited in shallow water and with micrite oncoidal coatings, suggests that the particles themselves may less commonly form at the same conditions of those other facies, but when exclusive they must represent a significant change. The often non-touching pattern of the spherulites suggests either pre-existence of a depositional matrix keeping the grains floating , and later diagenetically evolving to, or being replaced by cement, or simply rapid cement precipitation. The former possibility is in line with the clay silica-gel hypothesis raised and developed by Wright and Barnett 2014, 2015 and Tosca and Wright 2015 , closely followed by Herlinger et al. 2017 the fast cementation does not seem so likely, as if conditions were of quick carbonate precipitation then the other types of structures and particles would have formed, not only spherulites. Mercedes-Marti n et al. 2016 argued that clay-gels were not required to produce spherulitic deposits, which were more likely to have formed at the sediment-water interface in alkaline lakes rich in dissolved organic acids. There is no clear evidence in this study allowing to infer a relative depth location of the F4 deposition. Some previous authors assigning the spherulite formation within a matrix suggest it occurred in very shallow subsurface below the water-sediment interface Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2019 Herlinger et al., 2017 , whereas Kirkham and Tucker 2018 and Gomes et al. 2020 admit they may have formed either in situ in the water column, at the lake bed or in the subsurface, and also that may have been reworked and resedimented. 5.4. Facies 3 F3 As described, F3 corresponds to apparently traditional grainsupported limestones, namely intraclastic grainstones packstones, whose clasts are mostly F2B collapsed structure and remains with no or incipient reworking, plus a few more clearly grainy material intra clasts . However, a close coupled core and thin-section analysis strongly suggests that this facies type is mostly an inherited residual fabric of F2B diagenetically modified and or accumulated, almost non-reworked F2B remains grains , as discussed in Diagenesis. The depositional setting and palaeo water-depth would thus not significantly differ from those hosting the original shrubs of F2B, maybe locally subjected to moderate energy, short-lived current or wave flows carrying, reworking and redepositing the intraclastic material. The almost lack of recognition of sedimentary structures associated with regular waves or currents in the studied core material does not support the persistence of directional flows in a highly hydrodynamic environment. Barnett et al. 2018 interpreted one of their subtypes of grainstones-rudstones as colluvial wedges or debris aprons formed as a result of the sub-aerial disaggre gation of mounds formed largely of crystal shrubs however, as high lighted in 4.3., these deposits are different in several aspects from the facies defined in the present study. 5.5. Facies 4 F4 There is a range of possible mechanisms leading to spherulite genesis in carbonates and the occurrence of this type of particles is documented in different environments, namely in pedogenic and lacustrine carbon ates, microbial mats, speleothems, tuffs and travertines e.g. Wright et al., 1996 Dorobek et al., 2012 Wright, 2012 Wright and Barnett, 2015 Saller et al., 2016 Mercedes-Marti n et al., 2017 Rogerson et al., 2017 Chafetz et al., 2018 Kirkham and Tucker, 2018 and many ref erences therein . However, in the Pre-Salt carbonates the spherulitic material is rather unusual, because of their abundance at certain in tervals, even to define an individual facies here named F4 the commonly larger dimensions than in previous reported cases occur rence either scattered within other facies, floating in an argillaceous stevensitic matrix, or in zones with no traces of clay e.g. Muniz and Bosence, 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2020 Saller et al., 2016 Chafetz et al., 2018 . These spherulites could have grown at least in part within Mg Si gels, later transformed into stevensite clay and subsequently dissolved, producing excellent porosity Tosca and Wright, 2014, 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2020 Tutolo and Tosca, 2018 Wright and Rodriguez, 2018 . Different interpretations have been proposed, namely that fibro-radial calcite results from displacive concretionary crystal growth 5.6. Facies 5 F5 The clear reworked, heterogeneous aspect and tight packing of these intraclastic grainstones and packstones implies, moderate to high energy flows, rapid and weakly sorted grain deposition, likely in more distal and or surrounding zones of the lake relative to the bodies made of successive F2A and F2B. Such higher energy flows were probably episodic. The lack of recognition of mass-flow or syn-depositional deformation sedimentary structures suggests that no significant slope 14 A.C. Azere do et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 gradients existed in relation with F5 formation. Barnett et al. 2018 interpreted one of their subtypes of grainstones-rudstones as carbonate fan delta shorelines, an interpretation supported by a set of data not equally met here. 6. Facies associations Well-1 displays less facies variety than Well-2, with no record of F1, F2B2 and F4. On the other hand, F6 is highly represented in Well-1, where it is one of the dominant facies type together with F3 F3 is very commonly closely even at centimetric to millimetric scale asso ciated with F2 types. The subtypes of facies F2 F2A F2B F2BT have similar proportional representation and overall correspond to 43 of total identified facies occurrences in the core of Well-1. In the core of Well-2, facies diversity is much higher, as mentioned, with F2B being clearly dominant many intervals along the core correspond to this F2B, with F3 commonly associated and, hence, equally strongly represented. The occurrence of F3 isolated is much less significant, as in Well-1. The third most important facies is F2A, and overall facies F2 types F2A F2B F2BT F2B2 dominate, reaching 84 of total facies occurrences. F6 is absent in Well-2. The detailed coupled macro- and microscale analysis allowed preferential facies associations to be recognized across the studied intervals. Along Well-1two most common facies associations are identified, F2B F3 and F6 F3. Less commonly, F2B F2B2, F3 F2A and F5 F3 associations may be recognized. Along core of Well-2, facies associations more clearly defined are F2B F3 Figs. 7 B, E and F, 8 B , F2B F2A Figs. 4 F, 6 A and 11 E , F2B F2A-F3 Fig. 6 F and, also 5.7. Facies 6 F6 The oncoidal material being the dominant allochems in these grainstones rudstones and packstones floatstones clearly point to a very shallow water setting, with low to intermittently moderate energy, as required to form these organo-sedimentary structures the oncoids are one of the rare unequivocal evidence for microbial cyanobacterial activity in the studied material. Micrite and spar cements usually exhibit a pattern compatible with phreatic precipitation, but locally vadose cement was recognized which attests for episodic exposure and calcite precipitation at water table-subaerial interface. Overall, F6 is inter preted as having been deposited in very shallow, more restricted setting, slightly less alkaline to allow cyanobacteria existence, probably at the marginal belts and minor channels on lake margin. The fact that it is rare and only occurs in one of the studied wells reinforces the idea that a particular, non widespread depositional situation is associated with its formation. Fig. 10. Representation of the facies cyclicity pat terns as usually recognized in the examined cores Facies 2A, with its typically laminar layers, is suc ceeded by a strong development of the columnar shrubby structures of Facies 2B, 2BT and, less commonly, 2B2 or, variable intercalation of other facies F1, F4, F5 and F6 between F2A and F2B types may occur, interrupting the main depositional rhythm. The recognized basic facies succession pat terns are here considered as evidencing three main stages St of deposition development an initial stage St1 , marked by F2A an irregularly occurring, transitional stage St2 with deposition of any facies other than F2A and F2B and a clear shrub growing or development stage St3 . A Facies sequence column and sketch illustrating the ideal cyclothem. B Facies sequence columns and sketches illustrating the cyclical facies pattern in three real examples of the studied cores. Colour code for facies is the same in key of Fig. 3. For colour in this figure, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. 15 A.C. Azere do et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 relatively common, F2A-F2BT-F2B2. Less clear and sparser occurring associations of F3 F5 and F2B F2B2 are recorded. The recurrent succession of facies types along the studied cores show patterns of facies evolution and transition, in turn suggesting deposi tional rhythms, reflected in non-uniform cyclical intervals. These pat terns in the examined cores are usually recognized as follows Facies 2A, with its typically laminar layers, is succeeded by a strong development of the columnar shrubby structures of Facies 2B, 2BT and, less commonly, 2B2. Heterogeneous occurrence of the other facies F1, F4, F5 and F6 , either before, after or within former intervals may happen, as levels or lenses. The ideal cyclothem would be as represented in Fig. 10 A and three really observed examples are illustrated in Fig. 10 B. The recognized basic facies succession patterns are here considered as evidencing three main stages St of deposition development an initial stage St1 , marked by F2A an irregularly occurring, transitional stage St2 with deposition of any facies other than F2A and F2B and a clear shrub growing or development stage St3 . The laminar F2A would represent a likely restricted environmental stage, preceding apparently setting the stage for the ensuing strong development of shrubs. This first stage would be characterized by very shallow water column where tabular and laminar structures developed, but not easily the shrubs the water probably was not oversaturated relative to calcium carbonate and not extremely alkaline, hence water depth and chemical conditions not favourable enough for shrubs to develop. Subsequent change into thicker, though always shallow water col umn, hyper-saturated relative to calcium carbonate and extremely alkaline allowed and maintained for time enough the exuberant growth development of the shrub structures composing Facies 2B, 2BT and, less commonly, 2B2. Transitional or separating intervals of St2 encompass less clear situations with heterogeneous occurrence of other facies, either before, after or within any of both other phases. It is also to note that F3 may appear in any of the three phases, though being more common in the development stage associated with F2B, a situation that is consistent with the interpretation of its essentially diagenetic instead of depositional nature see 7. Diagenesis and 8. Discussion . An addi tional observation is that sometimes, at the top of F2B 2BT intervals, siliceous layers nodules occur, resembling a thin cap over the struc tures, which seems to be consistent with cessation of growth of the latter and silica precipitation, due to sudden pH change. Assuming that interpretation on facies regarding thickness of water column is correct, the cyclical facies pattern intervals could also partially represent cyclical shallowing-deepening episodes of the lake system. However, as stated, other factors, namely geochemical balance fluctuations and climatic modes are also considered to have been rele vant in controlling the development of these unconventional carbonate facies, therefore a direct link to shallowing-deepening cycles may not unequivocally be established here. What seems unequivocal is the ex istence of a cyclical facies pattern in the studied carbonate deposits. These interpretations are in agreement with previous works where cyclothems in the Barra Velha carbonates and in its equivalent in the Campos basin were recognized, though with some differences among the several authors concerning cyclothem components and cycle interpre tation Wright and Barnett, 2015 Muniz and Bosence, 2015 Faria et al., 2017 Farias et al., 2019 Wright, 2019 Gomes et al., 2020 .The basic cyclothems identified in previous works have in common a dominance of shrubs within the upper part of the elementary cyclothem, a facies arrangement termed Upward-increasing shrub pattern by Gomes et al. 2020 . The latter authors mentioned that a key feature of the Upwar d-increasing shrub pattern is an irregular surface above, whereas Wright and Barnett 2015 refer that the in situ shrubs at the top of the cyclothems may be separated by a thin grainstone composed mainly of re-worked shrubs, although the underlying shrubs rarely show any ev idence of truncation and erosion. In this study, rare similar cases were found, namely a grainstone made of shrub clasts F3 truncated by an irregular surface draped by a crust-like horizon, in turn partially broken and overlain by F2 fragments, locally collapsed. 7. Diagenesis The restrictions in data availability prevents a comprehensive and analytically supported diagenetic interpretation of the studied carbon ate rocks to be made, which is clearly a limitation here. However, petrographic studies give clues to the main processes having affected the successions and, in particular, to their impact on reservoir rock features. Therefore, identification and description of diagenetic processes and products is relevant to add knowledge on these reservoirs, regardless of missing analytical data, namely on fluid origins and geochemical con ditions themselves. Though definition of a diagenetic paragenetic sequence is inhibited, highlighting the influence of diagenesis is crucial and it is the aim of the present approach. The effects of diagenetic processes show variable development along each well studied intervals and between both wells. These processes are cementation common in both wells , dolomitization common but variable , dedolomitization uncommon , recrystallization common but seldom pervasive , silicification common but in thin intervals , compaction uncommon , fracturing common in Well 1, rare in Well 2 , brecciation rare and dissolution common and often intense in both wells . In the perspective of reservoir rocks, obviously dissolution creating or enhancing secondary porosity is a fundamental process, and it will be addressed in more detail. From petrographic examination it stands out that several phases of corrosion must have operated, but due to lack of other data dissolution and its currently observed overall effects will be treated here as an overarching mechanism and the distinction and possible timing of different phases will not be considered further. 7.1. Cementation In both cores, cementation is unevenly distributed in most facies though cement is naturally better identifiable in the grain-supported facies Figs. 8 A, 9 A-F, 11 A-C , it may be difficult sometimes to differentiate it from void infilling material Figs. 6 D and F, 7 B . Ce ments correspond to micrite, clayey micrite, dolomitic rhombic mosaics or microcrystalline locally crypto- to mesocrystalline siliceous mo saics very locally, pendant calcitic cement was identified in association with oncoidal particles of F6. The almost complete lack of spar cement is a noteworthy feature of these rocks, very locally microspar is observed when the inter-granular carbonate material is not micritic but micro to mesocrystalline, it is usually composed of dolomite euhedral to sub hedral rhombs or larger mosaic calcite crystals. Very locally, it was possible to identify a first generation of circum-granular bladed cement dolomite after calcite , followed by rhombic dolomite spread over void space and shrubby material Fig. 8 C . 7.2. Dolomitization dedolomitization As described, dolomitic crystals euhedral to subhedral rhombs are common, appearing either as spread over void space and facies elements themselves, namely in F2A and F2B, or as bounding or residual inter stitial material, which is difficult to define as primary cement or diagenetic dolomitized sediment matrix a particular case is the mentioned example of circum-granular bladed cement dolomite after calcite , shown in Fig. 8 C. Dolomite is more often associated with F2A, F2B, F3, F4 and F5 and it is more common in core from Well-2 than in core from Well-1. Locally, isolated particles may be dolomitized. The apparent impact of dolomite in porosity is varied, as it may either fill previous void spaces or, in contrast, when forming bridges and floating chains of rhombs, be apparently associated with conditions favouring high porosity devel opment, that would have left the dolomite as residual non dissolved material Figs. 8 D and 11 F . Locally, dolomitic limestone of entirely crystalline texture occurs, 16 A.C. Azere do et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 Fig. 11. Examples of some particular diagenetic features A F5 where grains are loosely distributed in large calcite cement amount, contrasting with the tighter texture more common in this facies. B Siliceous microcrystalline cement in F5. C Intraparticle WP and minor BP porosity developed in the oncoidal F6 minor amount of micritic cement occurs. D Mechanical compaction in F3. E Mechanical and chemical compaction effects on shrubs F2B , including low amplitude stylolites with residual seams arrowed . F Dolomitized shrub facies rhombs at the lower left of the photo . For colour in this figure, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. showing microcrystaline mosaics with rare intercrystal porosity. At a few intervals, particularly in the upper part of core from Well-1 and in the lower part of core from Well-2, apparently dolomitic petrographic fabrics were in fact proven to be calcitic in nature, so likely having been affected by dedolomitization. 17 A.C. Azere do et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 7.3. Recrystallization subtypes of the shrubby facies lacy F2B, F2B quasi-F3 and F3 . These are here interpreted as being part of a continuum of mostly in-situ deterioration of the original shrubby structures Figs. 7 C, D and 12 C . In fact, though at quick core scale examination it is not obvious, coupling core and thin-section high resolution analysis a ghost frame work texture was recognized. In spite of the highly porous very deli cate lacy aspect of the rocks here labelled lacy F2B, cryptic fabric resembling faint outlines of a linked and branching morphology is perceived, locally even a few remaining internal shrubby morphologies Fig. 12 C , suggesting it to be a residual texture from an originally connected framework, that is, former in-situ development of shrubbylike structures these may be dolomitized or not, with a crumbled aspect. The F2B quasi-F3 refers to close but less clear fabric patterns, produced by dissolution followed by some spalling and collapse disaggregation into pieces processes mixed shrub clasts, partially broken, collapsed fragments of shrubby material may occur, and also bridges made of micrite, F2A laminae and dolomite rhombs, these sometimes appearing to float in void space. This rock fabric looks closer to grain-dominated carbonates, having closer textural affinity with F3, thus the chosen term F2B quasi-F3 Fig. 12 A and B . Further devel opment leads to a ghost framework where the remnants appear as clasts, thus forming a residual fabric resembling a grain-supported one F3 . Facies 3, as described, corresponds to apparently grain-supported limestones, namely intraclastic grainstones packstones, whose clasts are mostly accumulated F2B collapsed structure and remains with no or incipient reworking, plus a few more clearly grainy material intraclasts and also may exhibit bridges between the main fabric elements. Shrub origin of the most of the material is clear. It is also commonly affected by dissolution processes, exhibiting high porosity the commonly rounded outline of grain-pore walls argues against mechanical breaking and redeposition being a relevant process. In fact, a transitional suite from F2B to lacy F2B and or to F2B quasi-F3 and to F3 is clearly identified in the studied rocks after detailed high resolution examination Fig. 12A F . There are very common examples of gradual lateral and vertical small-scale transitions covering the range F2B - lacy F2B F2B quasi F3 - F3 Figs. 7 B, E and F, 12 A, B, E, F or directly from F2B into F3 virtually without displacement Fig. 12 D . Furthermore, at core scale, it is also highly common to see interbedded and interwoven levels of F2B, F2BT and F3 facies types. Therefore, collating all the evidence it is here suggested that these fabrics have been formed mainly through shrub dissolution, disintegration and locally collapse, with almost in-situ or near-by redeposition, coupled with minor input of more reworked intraclasts the latter in the case of F3 . So, these facies types are considered as totally lacy F2B, F2B quasi F3 or mostly F3 an inherited residual fabric of F2B, diagenetically modified lacy F2B, F2B quasi F3 and or accumulated F3 . This process is commonly recognized throughout both cores, but usually it is not markedly pervasive it occurs either as irregular outlined individual zones or bands Fig. 8 B , more rarely in a disseminated manner across the bulk rock mass. 7.4. Silicification In both cores, siliceous occurrences are very common, in varied forms especially as nodules or layers with F2A Fig. 4 E and F2B Fig. 8 A , as microcrystalline cement in F3, F5 and F6 Figs. 9 C-F and 11 B , laminae or layers in F1 and F4, as silicified spherulites Fig. 9 C and D . However, as mentioned, in some cases it is not possible to be sure whether it was precipitated as siliceous cement or resulted from silici fication of previous carbonate cement. When there is a clear zone around grains contrasting in size and morphology with crystals in remaining intergranular space, it suggests that there was a precursor circumgranular cement, later silicified. There may be microcrystalline silica infilling intraparticle porosity Fig. 9 E and F . A particular aspect to be highlighted is the fact that siliceous bands nodules occur often over the top of F2B 2BT dominated intervals, resembling a thin cap that drapes the previous structures, which suggests periodic sudden pH changes see also 5. Palaeoenvironmental interpretation and 6. Facies associations . 7.5. Compaction, fracturing, brecciation Compaction record is not significant in the studied material. This process is somewhat more common in core from Well-1 than in core from Well-2, but it is never strong and almost exclusively restricted to mechanical compaction evidence, affecting mainly the laminated argillaceous limestones of F1 and grainier lithologies, as in F3, F4, F5 and F6. This is evidenced in F1, by crinckled argillaceous carbonate laminae Fig. 4 B that, when siliceous nodules or bands occur, are wrapped around them and, in the other facies, by tight grain arrange ments, concave-convex and long grain contacts, slightly deformed grains and rarer sutured contacts Figs. 8 F, 11 D and E . Fracturing is impor tant in Well-1 core, in which several families of fractures were observed, most of them totally or partially open. In Well-2 core, fracturing is much less significant, with fractures usually closed by silica or carbonate precipitates. Similarly, brecciation aspects occur more in Well-1 core, with low to moderate expression, mainly in F3, F5 and F6, rarely in F2B. 7.6. Dissolution Dissolution processes have highly impacted the rocks from both cores as shown by very common macro- to microscopic evidence of their effects, with variable corrosion intensity, mostly moderate to high, more rarely low. This is the most important cause of diagenetic transformation of original facies, creating diagenetic and depositional-diagenetic hybrid facies, which result in different reservoir facies properties, because pore system characteristics are modified. Dissolution leading to macroscopically and microscopically visible porosity has preferentially developed in facies F2A, F2B, F2BT and F3 Figs. 4 D, 6 E, 7 B F, 8 A and D, 12 A F , less commonly in F2B2 Fig. 7 A the facies F1, F4, F5 were less susceptible to dissolution, like F6 with local exceptions Fig. 11 C . A synthesis of the main porosity types occurring in each of the identified facies is presented in Fig. 13. According to the present study, specific, some unusual fabrics were created through very intense corrosional effects on the shrub facies, as addressed below. 8. Discussion As stated, the complex and unusual Brazilian lacustrine Pre-Salt carbonates are still under intense discussion due to the unknown na ture of a range of textures, structures and morphologies e.g. Wright, 2011, 2012, 2019 Dorobek et al., 2012 Tosca and Wright, 2014, 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2014, 2015, 2017a,b, 2020 Mercedes-Marti n et al., 2016, 2017, 2019 Ceraldi and Green, 2017 Herlinger et al., 2017 Rogerson et al., 2017 Wright and Rodri guez, 2018 Gomes et al., 2020 . The present work is not based on multidisciplinary dataset at the regional scale, so its aim is not to develop new models but to contribute to the knowledge and recognition of unsolved questions on these car bonates, using the pieces of information that were made available to this study. In particular, two aspects are addressed here i the termino logical problems arising from equivocal origin of main facies types F2 and ii the depositional versus diagenetic nature of singular facies types. As regards to the laminar carbonate composing F2A, it clearly differs from the argillaceous mudstones of F1 the latter show incipient to 7.6.1. Particular dissolution-related textures At certain intervals of the studied cores, dissolution has very strongly affected F2B in an even more particular way, according to interpretation in this study, resulting in specific textural varieties considered as 18 A.C. Azere do et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 Fig. 12. Diagenetic transformations of the shrub F2B, at thin-section scale A and B Illustration of in-situ progression from F2B into quasi F3 - F3 diagenetic facies , typically producing very porous rocks the two photos are from the same thin-section the arrow points to the common zone in both photos clear shrubs upper part of the photo coexist with higher porosity, less defined, more corroded shrub structures, resembling individual pieces but partially linked and not displaced quasi-F3 in addition, in B , more clearly granular-like framework is shown F3 , in which grains also suggest none to incipient reworking. Compare with E and F and see also text for explanation. C Excellent porosity of the facies subtype here named lacy F2B, interpreted as the residual fabric of intensely corroded shrub structures note arrowed pieces, with still recognizable remaining shrubby morphology from which a cryptic branching , delicate ghost framework is still recognizable it is therefore considered as a diagenetic facies see also Fig. 7 C and D and text for explanation . D Clear example of shrubs Sh giving birth laterally in millimetres to F3 grains Gr , in this case without significant displacement, but that could be reworked intraclasts mixed with the in-situ ones in F3 see also text for explanation . E Another example of the progressive evolution F2B - quasi F3 - F3 diagenetic evolution , typically producing very porous rocks shrub origin of the material is mostly clear. Arrows call attention to inter-connections among grains and the commonly rounded outline of grain-pore walls, that argues against mechanical breaking and redeposition. F Typical aspect of F2B - quasi F3 with excellent porosity. For colour in this figure, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. 19 A.C. Azere do et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 Fig. 13. Distribution of the main porosity types in the different facies defined in this work. marked sub-millimetric laminae, most of which clearly formed physi cally by the silt and clay sedimentation, with minor occurrence of small spherulites, and the rock appears tight and compact. In F2A, the laminae are more irregular in morphology and thickness, often crenulated and exhibiting inter- and intralaminae porosity, overall resembling tradi tional tabular-dominated stromatolite fabrics. However, no unequivocal sign of microbial related structures like filaments or cyanobacteria were recognized in this facies, as for instance is documented in similar de posits of the Campos Basin by Muniz and Bosence 2015 . For the Santos Basin, Wright and Barnett 2015 also state that demonstrable microbial macro- and microstructures are very rare in the Barra Velha Formation as a whole, comprising 1 of its thickness. With the data available for the present study, a conclusive opinion on the microbial versus non-microbial origin of F2A is inhibited it is also not possible to rule out an obvious third hypothesis, that of a hybrid genesis. Therefore, the classification terminology to apply to these car bonates remains a problem for the time being, justifying the option here for referring them as in-situ formed laminar, stromatolitic-like struc tures, meaning that they could be grown and or bounded, either chemically and or organically microbially . Regarding Facies 2B the subject is much more complex, and whether the shrub genesis is biotic, non-biotic or both is an issue that is beyond the scope of this study, as already stated. In broad terms, carbonate shrub structures were recorded in different depositional contexts under a range of designations, as summarized by Erthal et al. 2017 . However, the special features and degree of development of the Pre-Salt shrubs have no known analogue. According to Chafetz and Guidry 1999 , bacterial shrubs show very irregular forms, with outlines resembling common bushes, whereas crystal shrubs, along with crystalline calcite fans ray-crystal crusts , exhibit more geometric patterns but the same authors admit that the morphologies reflect the dominant biotic or non-biotic process, with both bacterial induced and abiotic precipitation involved. Rainey and Jones 2009 point to the likelihood that such differences between an abiotic and biotic influence depend on the in teractions of hydrodynamics of the fluid movement, saturation levels and growth rates. Rapid precipitation from highly saturated solutions may favour abiotic processes, but where rates are lower, microbial in teractions become more important. On the other hand, the calcite crystal pattern of stacked bands perpendicular to shrub upward growth axis is regarded by Saller et al. 2016 as indicating a microbial, photic-oriented growth. The examined material seems closer to the crystal shrubs than to the bacterial shrubs of Chafetz and Guidry 1999 the cases of more planar crust-like layers of calcite crystals separated by micrite linings may be roughly compared with the ray-crystal crusts of Chafetz and Guidry 1999 . Wright and Barnett 2015 stressed the very close morphological resemblance of the Pre-Salt crystal shrubs to those commonly found in travertine deposits, though not implying a travertine origin, in turn resembling the crystal shrubs of Chafetz and Guidry 1999 . An obvious result of this uncertainty concerning the nature and genetic mechanisms leading to this prominent shrub facies is the ter minology to be applied to its textural classification. If dominant mi crobial origin is accepted, these carbonates may be considered as organically-bounded in-situ, fitting into the traditional Dunham, 1962 definition of boundstones, being specifically named microbial boundstones. However, if no unequivocal evidence for organic origin can be proven and or if the abiotic hypotheses are favoured, they are not rigorously boundstones alternative terms could be the pseudo-bound stones or precipitated boundstones of Della Porta 2015 , and the cementstones of Wright 1992 . In particular, taking for more specific comparison the terminologies recently proposed for these Barra Velha carbonate facies, the F2B of this work fits well into the term shrubstones very recently coined by Gomes et al. 2020 , and is equivalent to the F1 F1a with Mg-silicate matrix or porous, respectively of Wright and Barnett 2017a . The facies subtypes here named lacy F2B and F2B quasi-F3 were never observed by the authors in previous studies on other sectors of the Santos Basin, neither are they documented as particular types in the published literature of the Brazil Pre-Salt carbonates, to the authors knowledge, though high porosity shrubby textures are common e.g. Terra et al., 2009 Rezende and Pope, 2015 Herlinger et al., 2017 Wright and Barnett, 2017a 2020 Farias et al., 2019 Gomes et al., 2020 . The F3 in general is broadly similar to previously referred grainstones and packstones, but its close link with F2B and mainly diagenetic origin is a novel interpretation here. This is in contrast to previous works, that regarded these grain-supported facies as entirely resulting from reworking of the shrub units and deposition of the resultant clast material. In fact, from this study it is believed that facies F3 corresponds to apparently conventional intraclastic grainstones packstones, but whose clasts are mostly F2B collapsed structure and remains with no or incipient reworking, plus a few more clearly grainy material intraclasts . This stands out more clearly either by cases where a transition is clearly seen directly from F2B into F3, virtually without displacement. Moreover, those carbonates are closely associated also with the previously undocumented facies lacy F2B, highly porous keeping a faint ghost fabric of a linked and branching morphology, suggesting dissolution of an originally in-situ development of shrubby-like framework and the F2B - quasi-F3 , similar but with less clearly shrubby original structure and exhibiting some amalgamated remains of F2B. All these types may show bridges between the main structures, made of micrite, F2A laminae and dolomite rhombs which sometimes appear to float in void space, suggesting that they are a residue of a more extensive interstitial matrix material. All the described features suggest that these textural types are mostly diagenetic, with a minor depositional component. Overall, it is proposed that lacy F2B, F2B quasi-F3 and F3 represent a diagenetic continuum, from completely diagenetic to mostly diagenetic with a minor depositional component. The depositional and diagenetically modified products resulting from each stage exhibit different pore-system network features, which 20 A.C. Azere do et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 may be relevant for petrophysical characterization of these reservoir rocks Fig. 14 . In a study of Pre-Salt carbonate units from Santos Basin, Rezende and Pope 2015 concluded that the size of shrubs and changes in pore throat size affect permeability, whereas shrub size sorting affects porosity and, when poorly sorted, also permeability because of pore system tortuosity. According to Tosca and Wright 2015 and Wright and Barnett 2017a , much of the porosity of these reservoirs is inter preted as owing to the dissolution of former Mg-silicate clays, which does not contradict the hypothesis here adopted of some of the apparent different facies actually just corresponding to the variable expression of different diagenetic stages, mainly of dissolution processes, impacting heterogeneously on same or very similar depositional facies.Whereas previous authors have especially focused on the preexistence or not of a labile matrix, namely in shrub facies, the novel point here is on the diagenetic modifications of the shrubby structures themselves, resulting in macro and, especially, microfabric variations and potentially pro ducing different types of reservoir facies. The best potential reservoir rocks, considering the observed core and petrographic characteristics, correspond to some of the depositional facies F2B F2BT and F2A and to these mostly diagenetic facies lacy F2B, F2B quasi-F3 and F3 . The identified facies types and subtypes, their assignment to deposi tional and diagenetic nature and potential reservoir quality in terms of porosity as examined in this study are summarized in Fig. 14. partial broken, amalgamated collapsed fragments of the shrubby material . - Facies 3 F3 Intraclastic grainstones packstones whose clasts are mostly F2B remnants. - Facies 4 F4 Spherulitic grainstones packstones. - Facies 5 F5 Intraclastic grainstones and packstones. - Facies 6 F6 Oncoidal grainstones rudstones and packstones floatstones. 2. Palaeoenvironmental interpretation of the facies for the studied sector fits into the shallow, low gradient, alkaline lake model. The laminar, crust shaped facies are regarded as reflecting the shallowest lake level in general, and the marginal zones when flooding increased the water column, but with no clear subaerial exposure evidence a charophyte occurrence, here documented for the first time in the Pre-Salt carbonates, is consistent with the inferred lacustrine environment. The oncoidal facies also corresponds to very shallow waters, with very local exposure, probably small marginal channels and or localized lenses within the wider lacustrine system. The well developed shrubs suggest a thicker water-column, with enough available space for those structures to grow without trun cation or exposure, besides the likely water chemistry control. The packstone and grainstones made mostly of reworked shrubs depos ited in similar depth, but higher energy conditions, whereas the clayey calcimudstone represent the deepest, more distal facies of the lacustrine setting, though not very deep neither with evidence for significant slope or abrupt gradient changes. The spherulite domi nated facies are not so common in the studied cores as usually in the Pre-Salt. The existence of spherulite interspersed in the other facies and with micrite oncoidal coatings assumed as shallow water sedi ments , suggests that the spherulitic particles themselves may form at the same conditions of those other facies, but when exclusive as in F4 they must represent a significant change. Thus, it is not clear to assigned them to a depth location, but more likely to hydrochemical changes in the system. 3. Facies patterns and transitions along the cores suggest depositional rhythms, in non-uniform cyclical intervals. These cyclical patterns are usually as follows Facies 2A laminar carbonate layers , is suc ceeded by strong development of the columnar shrubby structures of Facies 2B, 2BT and F2B2. Heterogeneous intercalation of the other facies F1, F4, F5 and F6 occur. These cyclical patterns are here interpreted as evidencing three main basic stages of facies deposi tion development, probably controlled by both depth and water chemistry an initial stage St1 in which the laminar facies domi nates, succeeded or not by a transitional or separating stage St2 corresponding to intercalation of facies other than F2A and F2B and a growing or development stage St3 giving birth to the exuberant shrubby structures. 4. Identification of depositional facies and diagenetic or essentially diagenetic facies is made for these reservoirs, that is, facies that were originally similar and developed in similar depositional con ditions, but now show different fabrics because were differently impacted by diagenesis. These essentially diagenetic facies are lacy F2B, F2B quasi-F3 and F3, which, together with some of the depositional ones F2B F2BT and F2A , define the best reservoir facies. The pore-system network differs between F2BT and lacy F2B, with usually larger size pores in F2BT and higher tortuosity in lacy F2B. The small, well sorted shrubs of F2B2 form a tighter, lower porosity texture, with straight channel pores. Therefore, recognition and distinguishing among these facies may be useful as guidance for petrophysical assessment of the reservoirs. 5. If the interpretations in this study are correct, they i reinforce existing datasets to improve understanding of these facies ii raise caution concerning some facies previously considered as separate depositional products, which in fact may not be the case but instead result from a spectrum of diagenetic modifications iii stress the relevance of microfacies analysis and diagenetic petrography to help 9. Summary and conclusions 1. Six facies plus six subtypes have been identified in carbonates from two wells on the informally named Pre-Salt of the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil, based on detailed microscale analysis coupled with the macroscale core study. The facies, which have been classified independently from existing descriptions and proposed terminol ogies of other authors for other wells and sectors of the basin, are as follows - Facies 1 F1 Argillaceous limestone with incipient to marked lamination. - Facies 2 F2 In-situ grown carbonates with a range of singular morphologies. This is subdivided into F2A, clearly laminated, including stromatolitic-like fabric F2B, shrubs, in turn differen tiated in subtypes F2BT robust, exuberant shrub structures , F2B2 micro-shrubs , lacy F2B highly porous, delicate lace-like fabric and F2B quasi-F3 some similar structures mixed with Fig. 14. Summary of the depositional versus diagenetic nature of the facies types identified in this study and their potential reservoir quality, judged only by visual analysis of porosity features and deduced dissolution susceptibility. Colour code for porosity degree is the same in key of Fig. 3. For colour in this figure, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. 21 Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 A.C. Azere do et al. deciphering how diagenetic modifications impact on quality and properties of the reservoir facies and iv add new issues to the naming and textural classification problems of the Brazil Pre-Salt carbonates. Ceraldi, T.S., Green, D., 2017. Evolution of the South Atlantic lacustrine deposits in response to Early Cretaceous rifting, subsidence and lake hydrology. In Ceraldi, T.S., Hodgkinson, R.A., Backe, G. Eds. , Petroleum Geoscience of the West Africa Margin, vol. 438. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 77 98. Chafetz, H.S., Guidry, S.A., 1999. Bacterial shrubs, crystal shrubs and ray-crystal shrubs bacterial v. abiotic precipitation. Sediment. Geol. 126, 57 74. Chaboureau, A.C., Guillocheau, F., Robin, C., Moulin, M., Aslanian, D., 2013. Paleogeographic evolution of the central segment of the South Atlantic during the Early Cretaceous times paleotopographic and geodynamic implications. Tectonophysics 604, 191 223. Chafetz, H.S., Barth, J., Cook, M., Guo, X., Zhou, J., 2018. Origins of carbonate spherulites implications for Brazilian Aptian Pre-Salt reservoir. Sediment. Geol. 365, 21 33. Choquette, P.W., Pray, L.C., 1970. Geologic nomenclature and classification pf porosity in sedimentary carbonates. Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Bull. 54, 207 250. Della Porta, G., 2015. Carbonate build-ups in lacustrine, hydrothermal and fluvial settings comparing depositional geometry, fabric types and geochemical signature. In Bosence, D.W.J., Gibbons, K.A., Le Heron, D.P., Morgan, W.A., Pritchard, T., Vining, B.A. Eds. , Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production, vol. 418. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 17 68. Dorobek, S., Piccoli, L., Coffey, B., Adams, A., 2012. Carbonate rock-forming processes in the Presalt sag successions of Campos Basin, offshore Brazil evidence for seasonal, dominantly abiotic carbonate precipitation, substrate controls, and broader geologic implications. In American Association of Petroleum Geologists Search and Discovery Article 90153 2012, AAPG Hedberg Conference Microbial Carbonate Reservoir Characterization, Houston, Texas, 3-8 June 2012. Dunham, R.J., 1962. Classification of carbonate rocks according to depositional texture. In Ham, W.E. Ed. , Classification of Carbonate Rocks, vol. 1. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Memoir, pp. 108 121. Embry, A.F., Klovan, J.E., 1971. A Late Devonian reef tract on northeastern Banks Island, NWT. Bull. Can. Petrol. Geol. 19, 730 781. Erthal, M.M., Capezzuoli, E., Mancini, A., Claes, H., Soete, J., Swennen, R., 2017. Shrub morpho-types as indicator for the water flow energy Tivoli travertine case Central Italy . Sediment. Geol. 347, 79 99. Faria, D.L.P., Reis, A.T., Souza Jr., O.G., 2017. Three-dimensional stratigraphicsedimentological forward modeling of an Aptian carbonate reservoir deposited during the sag stage in the Santos Basin, Brazil. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 88, 676 695. Farias, F.A., Szatmari, P., Bahniuk, A., Franc a, A.B., 2019. Evaporitic carbonates in the Pre Salt of Santos Basin genesis and tectonic implications. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 105, 251 272. Gomes, J.P., Bunevich, R.B., Tedeschi, L.R., Tucker, M.E., Whitaker, F.F., 2020. Facies classification and patterns of lacustrine carbonate deposition of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazilian pre-salt. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 113, 1 21, 104176. Hasiuk, F.J., Kaczmarek, S.E., 2015. Geochemical evidence of biotic influence in Brazilian Pre-salt Carbonates. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Search and Discovery. Article 51190. Herlinger, R.J., Zambonato, E.E., De Ros, L.F., 2017. Influence of diagenesis on the quality of Lower Cretaceous Pre-Salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs from northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. J. Sediment. Res. 87, 1285 1313. Jones, B.F., 1986. Clay mineral diagenesis in lacustrine settings. In Mumpton, F.A. Ed. , Studies in Diagenesis, vol. 1578. United States Geological Survey, Reston, VA, Bulletins, 291 30. Karner, G.D., Gamboa, L.A.P., 2007. Timing and origin of the South Atlantic pre-salt sag basins and their capping evaporates. In Schreiber, B.C., Lugli, S., Babel, M. Eds. , Evaporites through Space and Time, vol. 285. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 15 35. Khoury, H.N., Eberl, D.D., Jones, B.F., 1982. Origin of magnesium clays from the Armargosa desert, Nevada. Clay Clay Miner. 30 5 , 327 336. Kirkham, A., Tucker, M.E., 2018. Thrombolites, spherulites and fibrous crusts Holkerian, Purbeckian, Aptian context, fabrics and origins. Sediment. Geol. 374, 69 84. Konhauser, K.O., 2006. Introduction to Geomicrobiology. Wiley, New York. Lima, B.E., De Ros, L.F., 2019. Deposition, diagenetic and hydrothermal processes in the Aptian Pre-Salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs of the northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Sediment. Geol. 383, 55 81. Mercedes-Marti n, R., Rogerson, M., Brasier, A.T., Vonhof, H.B., Prior, T.J., Fellows, S.M., Reijmer, J.J.G., Billing, I., Pedley, H.M., 2016. Growing spherulitic grains in saline, hyperalkaline lakes experimental evaluation of the effects of Mg-clays and organic acids. Sediment. Geol. 335, 93 102. Mercedes-Marti n, R., Brasier, A.T., Rogerson, M.R., Reijmer, J.J.G., Vonhof, H.B., Pedley, H.M., 2017. A depositional model for spherulitic carbonates associated with alkaline, volcanic lakes. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 86, 168 191. Mercedes-Marti n, R., Ayora, C., Tritlla, J., Sa nchez-Roma n, M., 2019. The hydrochemical evolution of alkaline volcanic lakes a model to understand the South Atlantic Presalt mineral assemblages. Earth Sci. Rev. 198, 1 19, 102938. Mohriak, W.U., Szatmari, P., 2008. Tecto nica de Sal. In Mohriak W.U., Szatmari P., dos Anjos S.M. eds , Sal, Geologia e Tecto nica, exemplos nas bacias brasileiras. In Beca Edic o es Ltda, Sa o Paulo, pp. 90 163. Moreira, J.L.P., Madeira, C.V., Gil, J.A., Machado, M.A.P., 2007. Bacia de Santos. Bol. Geocie ncias da Petrobras 15, 531 554. Muniz, M.C., Bosence, D.W.J., 2015. Pre-salt microbialites from the Campos Basin offshore Brazil image log facies, facies model and cyclicity in lacustrine carbonates. In Bosence, D.W.J., Gibbons, K.A., Le Heron, D.P., Morgan, W.A., Pritchard, T., Vining, B.A. Eds. , Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Authors contributions ANA C. AZERE DO - Conceptualization, main writing, data acquisi tion, collating and analysis, interpretations, discussion. LUI S V. DUARTE - participation in writing, data acquisition and analysis, discussion. ALEXANDRE P. SILVA - data acquisition, collating and analysis. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Acknowledgements This work was initially developed with the participation of the three authors A. C. Azere do and L.V. Duarte, consultants A. P. Silva, MSc student in a Universidade Federal Fluminense UFF R D project sponsored by a Petrogal Brasil levy under the ANP Brazil National Pe troleum Agency rules. We acknowledge the Project leaders Luiz Gambo a and Andre Ferrari, and the Post-Graduation coordinator at UFF Wagner Lupinacci, for collaboration in the project and guidance of A.P. Silva MSc at UFF. We also wish to thank Rui Baptista Galp Energia, Lisboa , Maria Olho-Azul and Carlos Augusto Petrogal-Brasil, Rio de Janeiro for their cooperation in different aspects that made easier the way to this work. A. C. Azere do also acknowledges the financial support FCT through project UIDB 50019 2020 IDL at later stages of this work. We are thankful to two anonymous reviewers for their helpful and constructive comments that clearly contributed to improve this manuscript. References Azere do, A.C., Duarte, L.V., Baptista, R., Vieira, S.G., Olho-Azul, Martins M., 2011. Microbialites from rift and sag systems new insights into terminological and classification issues EGU General Assembly 2011, Vienna, April 2011. Geophys. Res. Abstr. 13, EGU2011 7473. Azere do, A.C., Silva, A.P., Duarte, L.V., Martins, M Olho-Azul, 2018. Distinguishing depositional from diagenetic facies a crucial step towards understanding unconventional carbonate reservoirs like the complex Brazil Pre-Salt. EGU General Assembly 2018, Vienna, April 2018. Geophys. Res. Abstr. 20, EGU2018 19032. Barnett, A.J., Obermaier, M., Amthor, J., Juk, K., Camara, R., Sharafodin, M., Bolton, M., 2018. Origin and significance of thick carbonate grainstone packages in nonmarine successions a case study from the Barra Velha Formation. In Santos Basin. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Search and Discovery Article 11116, Adapted from Poster Presentation, AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition, Salt Lake City, Utah, US, May 20-23, 2018. Buckley, J.P., Bosence, D., Elder, C., 2015. Tectonic setting and stratigraphic architecture of an Early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonate platform, Sugar Loaf High, Santos Basin, Brazil. In Bosence, D.W.J., Gibbonsm, K.A., Le Heron, D.P., Morgan, W.A., Pritchard, T., Vining, B.A. Eds. , Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production, vol. 418. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 175 191. Burne, R.V., Bauld, J., De Decker, P., 1980. Saline lake Charophytes and their geological significance. J. Sediment. Petrol. 50 I , 281 293. Cainelli, C., Mohriak, W.U., 1999. Some remarks on the evolution of sedimentary basins along the eastern Brazilian continental margin. Episodes 22 3 , 206 216. Calvo, J.P., Blanc-Valleron, M.M., Rodri guez-Arandi a, J.P., Rouchy, J.M., Sanz, M.E., 1999. Authigenic clay minerals in continental evaporitic environments. In Thiry, M., Simon-Coin, R. Eds. , Palaeoweathering, Palaeosurfaces and Related Continental Deposits, vol. 27. International Association of Sedimentologists, Special Publication, pp. 129 151. Carlotto, M.A., Silva, R.C.B., Yamato, A., Trindade, W.L., Moreira, J.L.P., Fernandes, R.A. R., Ribeiro, O.J.S., Gouveia Jr., W.P., Carminati, J.P., Qicai, D., Junfeng, Z., SilvaTelles Jr., A.C., 2017. Libra a newborn giant in the Brazilian Pre-Salt province. In Merrill, R.K., Sternbach, C.A. Eds. , Giant Fields of the Decade 2000 2010, vol. 113. American Association of Petroleum Geologist Memoir, pp. 165 176. Carminatti, M., Wolff, B., Gamboa, L.A.P., 2008. New Exploratory Frontiers in Brazil. 19th World Petroleum Congress, p. 11. Madrid, Spain, June 29-July 3. 22 Journal of South American Earth Sciences 108 2021 103202 A.C. Azere do et al. Implications for Global Exploration and Production, vol. 418. Geological Society of London, Special Publications, pp. 221 242. Perri, E., Tucker, M.E., Slowakiewicz, M., Whitaker, F., Bowen, L., Perrotta, I.D., 2018. Carbonate and silicate biomineralization in a hypersaline microbial mat Mesaieed sabkha, Qatar roles of bacteria, extracellular polymeric substances and viruses. Sedimentology 65, 1 33. Pietzsch, R., Oliveira, D.M., Tedeschi, L.R., Neto, J.R.Q., Figueiredo, M.F., Vazquez, J.C., Souza, R.S., 2018. Palaeohydrology of the Lower Cretaceous presalt lacustrine system, from rift to post-rift phase, Santos Basin, Brazil. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 507, 60 80. Poropat, S.F., Colin, J.-P., 2012. Early Cretaceous ostracod biostratigraphy of eastern Brazil and western Africa an overview. Gondwana Res. 22, 772 798. Rainey, D.K., Jones, B., 2009. Abiotic versus biotic controls on the development of the Fairmont Hot Spring carbonate deposit, British Columbia, Canada. Sedimentology 56, 1832 1857. Rezende, M.F., Pope, M.C., 2015. Importance of depositional texture in pore characterization of subsalt microbialite carbonates, offshore Brazil. In Bosence, D. W.J., Gibbonsm, K.A., Le Heron, D.P., Morgan, W.A., Pritchard, T., Vining, B.A. Eds. , Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, vol. 418. Geological Society of London, Special Publications, pp. 193 207. Rogerson, M., Mercedes-Martin, R., Brasier, A.T., McGill, R.A.R., Prior, T.J., Vonhof, H. B., Fellows, S.M., Reijmer, J.J.G., McClymont, E., Billing, I., Matthews, A., Pedley, H. M., 2017. Are spherulitic lacustrine carbonates an expression of large-scale mineral carbonation A case study from the East Kirkton Limestone, Scotland. Gondwana Res. 48, 101 109. Saller, A., Rushton, S., Buambua, L., Inman, K., McNeil, R., Dickson, J.T., 2016. Presalt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola. AAPG Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull. 100, 1135 1164. Szatmari, P., 2000. Habitat of petroleum along the south atlantic margins. In Mello, M., Katz, B. Eds. , Petroleum Systems of South Atlantic Margins American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir, vol. 73, pp. 69 75. Tavares, A.C., Borghi, L., Corbett, P., Lopes, J.N., Ca mara, R., 2015. Facies and depositional environments for the coquinas of the Morro do Chaves formation, Sergipe-Alagoas Basin, defined by taphonomic and compositional criteria. Braz. J. Genet. 45 3 , 415 429. Teboul, P.-A., Kluska, J.-M., Marty, N.C.M., Debure, M., Durlet, C., Virgone, A., Gaucher, E.C., 2017. Volcanic rock alterations of the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola - insights from an integrated petrological, geochemical and numerical approach. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 80, 394 411. Terra, G.J.S., Spadini, A.R., Franc a, A.B., Sombra, C.L., Zambonato, E.E., Juschaks, L.C. S., Arienti, L.M., Erthal, M.M., Blauth, M., Franco, M.P., Matsuda, N.S., Silva, N.G.C., Moretti-Ju nior, P.A., D Avila, R.S.F., Souza, R.S., Tonietto, S.N., Anjos, S.M.C., Campinho, V.S., Winter, W.R., 2009. Carbonate rock classification applied to Brazilian sedimentary basins. Bol. Geocie ncias da Petrobras 18, 9 29. Thompson, D.L., Stilwell, J.D., Hall, M., 2015. Lacustrine carbonate reservoirs from Early Cretaceous rift lakes of Western Gondwana Pre-Salt coquinas of Brazil and west Africa. Gondwana Res. 28 1 , 26 51. Tosca, N.J., Wright, V.P., 2014. The formation and diagenesis of Mg-clay minerals in lacustrine carbonate reservoirs American Association of Petroleum Geologists Search and Discovery Article 51002, adapted from oral presentation. In 2014 AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition, Houston, Texas, April 6 9, 2014. Tosca, N.J., Wright, V.P., 2015. Diagenetic pathways linked to labile Mg-clays in lacustrine carbonate reservoirs a model for the origin of secondary porosity in the Cretaceous pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, offshore Brazil. In Armitage, P.J., Butcher, A.R., Churchill, J.M., Csoma, A.E., Hollis, C., Lander, R.H., Omma, J.E., Worden, R.H. Eds. , Reservoir Quality of Clastic and Carbonate Rocks Analysis, Modelling and Prediction, vol. 435. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 33 46. Tutolo, B.M., Tosca, N.J., 2018. Experimental examination of Mg-silicate carbonate system at ambient temperature implications for alkaline chemical sedimentation and lacustrine carbonate formation. Geochem. Cosmochim. Acta 225, 80 101. Wright, V.P., 1992. A revised classification of limestones. Sediment. Geol. 76, 177 185. Wright, V.P., 2011. Reservoir architectures in non-marine carbonates. In American Association of Petroleum Geologists Search and Discovery Article 40801, Adapted from Oral Presentation, AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition, Houston, Texas, USA, April 10 13, 2011. Wright, V.P., 2012. Lacustrine carbonates in rift settings the interaction of volcanic and microbial processes on carbonate deposition. In Garland, J., Neilson, J.E., Laubach, S.E., Whidden, K.J. Eds. , Advances in Carbonate Exploration and Reservoir Analysis, vol. 370. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 39 47. Wright, V.P., 2019. The Pre-Salt reservoirs of the South Atlantic. GEOExPro 29 31. September 2019. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2014. Cyclicity and carbonate-silicate gel interactions in Cretaceous alkaline lakes. In American Association of Petroleum Geologists Search and Discovery Article 51011, Adapted from Oral Presentation, AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition, Houston, Texas, April 6 9, 2014. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2015. An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates. In Bosence, D.W.J., Gibbons, K.A., Le Heron, D.P., Morgan, W.A., Pritchard, T., Vining, B.A. Eds. , Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production, vol. 418. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 209 219. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2017a. Classifying reservoir carbonates when the status quo simply does not work a case study from the Cretaceous of the South Atlantic. In American Association of Petroleum Geologists Search and Discovery Article 51419, Adapted from Oral Presentation, AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition, Houston, Texas, 2 5 April 2017. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2017b. Critically evaluating the current depositional models for the Pre-Salt Barra Velha Formation, offshore Brazil. In American Association of Petroleum Geologists Search and Discovery, Article 51439, Adapted from Keynote Address, AAPG SEG International Conference and Exhibition, London, England, 15 18 October 2017. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2020. The textural evolution and ghost matrices of the Cretaceous Barra Velha Formation carbonates from the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. Facies 66, 14 32. Wright, V.P., Rodri guez, K., 2018. Reinterpreting the South Atlantic Pre-Salt Microbialite reservoirs petrographic, isotopic and seismic evidence for a shallow evaporitic lake depositional model. First Break 36, 71 77. Wright, V.P., Beck, V.H., Sanz-Montero, M.E., 1996. Spherulites in calcrete laminar crusts biogenic CaCO3 precipitation as a major contributor to crust formationdiscussion. J. Sediment. Res. 66, 1040 1041. 23

[END_OF_PAPER]

Libra beyond the Mero field Geologic and stratigraphic aspects, Santos Basin Brazilian Pre-salt Province Carlos Mikael Arnemann Eliane Petersohn Rodrigo Morelatto Ju lio Cesar dos Santos Vital Brazilian National Agency of Petroleum, Natural Gas and Biofuels Cartagena April 21 st , 2022 Outline Introduction The Mero Field Mero Libra Comparison The Libra Block Geological Assessment Remaining Challenges 1 Introduction Mero and Libra location Jade Buzios Gato do Mato Mero Libra Itapu Tita Berbiga o Sururu Atapu Tre s Marias Saturno Se pia Lapa A gata Tupi BM-S-24 Sapinhoa Cruzeiro do Sul Pau-Brasil Brazil The beginning... Libra Block was awarded in 2013 in the first bidding round executed by the Brazilian government under the new production sharing agreement for the pre-salt areas. The winner consortium is formed by Petrobras Shell, Total, CNOOC, CNPC, and PPSA. The Libra Consortium is led by Petrobras with a 40 interest in partnership with Shell 20 , Total 20 , CNPC 10 , and CNOOC Limited 10 . Pre -Sal Petro leo S.A. PPSA represents the Brazilian Federal Government on production sharing agreements. The Libra block is spread over 1,548 km2 in approximately 2,100m deep water. Original Libra Block as offered in the 1st Production sharing bidding round Libra Block after Mero field declaration of commerciality Mero Field Libra Block The Mero Field was declared commercial in 2017 Current state of Libra Block Libra Block Mero Field In 2021 the Libra Consortium has relinquished the southeast area of the block It was considered as an area of low potential by the consortium 2 The Mero Field The Mero Field Mero is the third-largest Pre-salt field behind Buzios and Tupi. Mero means a large saltwater fish of the genus Epinephelus. It may reach more than 2 meters long and 400 kg in weight. 1 It was discovered by the 2-ANP-2A-RJS, appraisal well that was drilled in 2010 by Petrobras in partnership with ANP. Petrobras is the operator of the Libra Consortium with a 40 interest in partnership with Shell 20 Total 20 CNPC 10 and CNOOC 10 . PPSA manages the Libra Production Sharing Contract. Mero has reservoirs with good quality oil and high commercial value 29o API Recent stromatolites from Shark Bay, WA Source Department of Mines and Petroleum of Australia The field s total recoverable volume is estimated by Petrobras at 3.3 billion barrels of oil Offshore Energy, 2017 . 1 PETROBRAS, 2017. Libra field renamed Mero following declaration of commerciality The Mero field Northwestern Area Mero Field Central Area Libra Block Southeastern Area Buzios Field Petersohn et al. 2021 The Mero field Mero is still under the early production system The processing capacity of the FPSO is 50,000 barrels per day bpd of oil and 4 million m3 d of gas. Mero Field Libra Block Petrobras expects starting production by 2022. FPSO Guanabara, which will be the first definitive system to operate in Mero has just arrived in the field. The FPSO will be connected to the wells and subsea equipment and final tests will be carried out ahead of the first production scheduled to occur in the first half of the year. Buzios Field Petersohn et al. 2021 3-BRSA-1345-RJS 3-BRSA-1345-RJS 3-BRSA-1339A-RJS 3-BRSA-1339A-RJS 2-ANP-2A-RJS 2-ANP-2A-RJS 3-BRSA-1342A-RJS 3BRSA-1342A-RJS 3-BRSA-1322-RJS 3-BRSA-1322-RJS Sea Bottom Top of Evaporites Top Reservoir Top Camboriu Top Basement Fault Arbitrary seismic line survey R0264 PULSAR courtesy CGG Petersohn et al. 2021 3 Mero Libra Comparison Mero Field Libra Block Comparison Mero field Libra block Fluid is oil, 27 30 API GOR 360 438 m3 m3 CO2 5 46 At least 2 OWC identified Well 3-BRSA-1267A-RJS gas condensate CO2 up to 67 Fluid contact has not been identified Distinct pressure gradient from Mero Mero Field Libra Block Comparison 2-ANP-2A-RJS 3-BRSA-1305A-RJS 3-BRSA-1267A-RJS 3-BRSA-1345-RJS Upper OWC -5,705m Lower OWC -5,766m Igneous Petersohn et al. 2021 Simplified schematic representation Libra Mero Non reservoir in the middle Well did not identify a fluid contact Top reservoir base of salt vvvvvvvv vvvvvvvv OWC Gas-water contact Depth Pressure 4 The Libra Block Geological Assessment The Libra block - Geology Mero field W Libra block E N W E S Petersohn et al. 2021 The Libra block - Geology Mero field W Libra block E N W E S Petersohn et al. 2021 The Libra Block Geology Well 3-BRSA-1310-RJS Drilled in a saddle between the Mero field and the Libra high K44, K46, and K48 sequences Intercalation with igneous rocks Intense recrystallization No reservoir 3-BRSA-1310-RJS Petersohn et al. 2021 The Libra block - Geology Mero field W Libra block E N W E S Petersohn et al. 2021 The Libra block - Geology Well 3-BRSA-1267A-RJS Drilled in the Libra structural apex Resulted in gas condensate K44, K46, and K48 sequences intercalated with igneous rocks K38 sequence coquinas interspersed with mudstones Predominance of igneous rocks No fluid contacts 3-BRSA-1267A-RJS Petersohn et al. 2021 The Libra block - Geology Well 4-BRSA-1346-RJS Drilled on the flank of the Southeastern high Same stratigraphic sequences Predominance of laminites mudstones Absence of hydrocarbon shows 4-BRSA-1346-RJS Petersohn et al. 2021 The Libra block - Geology 2-ANP-2A-RJS 3-BRSA-1255-RJS 3-BRSA-1267A-RJS 3-BRSA-1350-RJS 3-BRSA-1310-RJS 3-BRSA-1342A-RJS Mero field Libra block Sea Bottom Top Reservoir Top Basement Top of Evaporites Top Seq. K38 Igneous Rocks Arbitrary seismic line survey R0264 PULSAR courtesy CGG Fault Petersohn et al. 2021 5 The Remaining Challenges The Libra block Remaining challenges Identification of fluid contacts Fluid nature gas condensate or huge gas cap with oil layer like the Jupiter prospect Low-sampled fluid volume relative to the reservoir size Condensate to Gas Ratio Total condensate in place Development challenges Heavy CO2 contamination Reservoir quality effects of thermal recrystallization Need for additional fluid sampling and appraisal wells epetersohn anp.gov.br www.gov.br anp pt-br Av. Rio Branco 65, 12th to 22nd floor - Rio de Janeiro Brazil Phone 55 21 2112-8100

[END_OF_PAPER]

Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of South American Earth Sciences journal homepage www.elsevier.com locate jsames Three-dimensional characterization of the Bu zios Field reveals implications on the tectonostratigraphic evolution of the Santos Basin using combined seismic attributes and well-logs analysis Fernanda Moura Costa a, , Aline Tavares Melo b, Tiago Ama ncio Novo a a b UFMG Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Brazil UCD University College Dublin, Ireland A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T Keywords Seismic characterization Tectonic evolution Rift basins Santos basin Bu zios field The Bu zios Field is one of the most prolific petroleum fields along the Eastern Brazilian Margin. Despite sig nificant research conducted restrictedly on the pre-salt reservoirs, few studies have focused on the threedimensional characterization of the entire Bu zios Field area. Therefore this work aims to spatially characterize a volume along the Bu zios Field area using 3D seismic volume interpretation, seismic attributes, and well-log data. The combined use of these tools allowed the understanding of several parameters concerning the tecto nostratigraphic evolution of the Santos Basin. Within the mapped area, we identified five units Syn-Rift I, SynRift II, Post-Rift I, Post-Rift II, Drift I, and Drift II. The 3D model reveals significant features such as the depth variation of the Syn-Rift I unit and the heterogeneous morphology of the Post-Rift II unit. The Syn-Rift I unit is deeper towards the N-NW and shallower towards the S-SE due to a regional half-grabens system. This system impacts the pre-salt geometry and thickness, as structural highs and lows are relevant factors in sediment ac commodation. The Post-Rift I unit has a predominantly regular geometry and thickness but tends to thicken towards the S-SE and exhibits slight downward flexure towards the NE in the southeast of the Bu zios Field. In three dimensions, the heterogeneous morphology of the Post-Rift II unit is evidenced by the variable thickness and irregular topography, accounting for the intense halokinesis in the Santos Basin. Above the evaporite layer, the thickness of the Drift I unit is highly conditioned by salt morphology, with thicker and deformed packages in areas of thinner salt section. On the other hand, the Drift II unit shows relatively constant thickness with minor variations near fault zones. Comparisons with other fields within the Santos Basin Tupi and Sapinhoa Lapa reveal differences in layer thickness, mobilization, and rotation of the syn-rift blocks. The Post-Rift I layer Barra Velha Fm. and the Post-Rift II package Ariri Fm. are thinner and less mobilized in the Bu zios Field area. Moreover, the syn-rift blocks are less rotated, and the internal reflectors have a lower inclination in the study area when compared to these other fields. Therefore, this research concludes that the lower mobilization of salt, the lower thickness of the post-rift package, and the minor syn-rift block rotation observed in the Bu zios Field area are associated with the relative distance from the continental margin and, consequently, with the amount of displacement generated by the South Atlantic Rift. In this case, the Bu zios Field is located in a more proximal portion than the Tupi and Sapinhoa Lapa fields, exhibiting features suggestive of a lower displacement. 1. Introduction The exploration of petroleum in the eastern Brazilian margin basins has gained great expression over the last 50 years, especially after the start of hydrocarbon production in the Campos Basin in the late 1970s Pereira and Macedo, 1990 . In the 1970s, some projects led to a systematic investigation of the offshore sedimentary basins using geophysical data. The interpretation was based on geological data mainly stratigraphic results of exploratory wells drilled by Petrobras and majorly seismic and potential field data to support the interpreta tion of the tectono-sedimentary architecture of the several segments along the continental margin Mohriak and Fainstein, 2012 . Between Corresponding author. E-mail addresses fmourac95 gmail.com, fernandamouracosta ufmg.br F. Moura Costa , aline.melo ucd.ie A. Tavares Melo , tiagoanovo gmail.com T. Ama ncio Novo . https doi.org 10.1016 j.jsames.2023.104541 Received 16 June 2023 Received in revised form 14 August 2023 Accepted 16 August 2023 Available online 25 August 2023 0895-9811 2023 Published by Elsevier Ltd. F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 the mid-1970s and the mid-1980s, the Campos Basin was established as an important oil producer. However, due to the second oil crisis and the need to increase domestic production, it was necessary to search for new petroleum sources. In 1980, the first occurrence of oil stored in turbidite sandstones, in the post-salt section, was registered in the Santos Basin Fig. 1 . In 2005, the discovery of a carbonate reservoir in the deep pre-salt succession at the south portion of the basin increased the expectation of a great oil producer Chang et al., 2008 Souza and Sgarbi, 2016, 2019 . However, characterizing deep water features can be defiant because the mineralogical composition and diagenetic pro cesses can interfere with variations in pore shape and interconnectivity, thus exerting a high influence on the elastic properties of carbonate rocks Dias et al., 2019 . As a result of the pre-salt discovery in 2005, the Santos Basin gained significant attention and became the focus of numerous studies to sup port oil and gas exploration. Souza et al. 2007 associated the presence of transversal structures in the north portion of the basin with possible transfer faults by combining 2D seismic, gravity, and magnetic data, integrated with well logs. Assine et al. 2008 defined the depocenter migration of the stratigraphic sequences using seismic sections and well logs, showing how the salt tectonics is intimately related to the evolution of the Neo-Cretaceous progradational clastic wedges and, consequently conditioning the hydrocarbon migration of the post-salt section in the Santos Basin. Halokinesis also play an important role in controlling the structural styles of petroleum systems. In the Santos Basin, the investi gation of the interplay between salt and sediment integrating seismic interpretation, kinematic restoration, and analog modeling led to the conclusion that differential loading was the main driving mechanism to trigger halokinesis Guerra and Underhill, 2012 . In addition to the seismic interpretation, sedimentary analysis is also performed based on integrating sidewall core samples and well logs. The seismic patterns discrimination is used to characterize the tectonic and depositional evolution of the Barra Velha Formation in a sector of the Outer High of the Santos Basin, leading to the definition of shallowing and flooding upwards cycles responsible for the pre-salt reservoirs deposition Neves et al., 2019 . Regarding the Bu zios Field Fig. 1 , Castro and Lupinacci 2019 proposed a flow of characterization of the pre-salt carbonate reservoirs from well logs aiming to evaluate the Barra Velha and Itapema forma tions by rock physics crossplots. In this work, the authors also propose segmenting the rift-sag phase into Lower Sag and Upper Sag. Modeling the distribution of petrophysical properties of a reservoir assists in the spatial characterization of these complex deposits. Thus, a model-based inversion of seismic data into an acoustic impedance volume was applied to the evaluation of the relationship between acoustic imped ance and porosity showing trends related to Mg-clays contends in the Bu zios Field reservoir Dias et al., 2019 . Seismic attributes are important to assist the subsurface interpreta tion from seismic data and are defined as any measure of seismic data that helps us visually enhance or quantify features of interpretation in terest Chopra and Marfurt, 2007 . In a general sense, this definition encompasses all quantities extracted from seismic data by calculations, such as impedance inversion and pore -pressure prediction. The appli cation of seismic attributes is widely used in the characterization of a petroleum reservoir. Thus, these attributes aim to provide accurate and detailed information to the interpreter on structural, stratigraphic, and lithological parameters of the seismic prospect Taner, 2001 Chopra and Marfurt, 2007 . Summarily, according to Brown 2011 , time-derived attributes provide structural information, and amplitude-derived attributes pro vide stratigraphic and reservoir information. Frequency-derived attri butes are poorly understood, however, they could provide additional useful stratigraphic and reservoir information. Attenuation can yield information on permeability. Hybrid attributes are a combination of amplitude and frequency information. Each of these attributes relates to each other, where some attributes have a particular sensitivity to the nature of the reservoir and several others are better at presenting in formation or subsurface anomalies that were not initially identified by Fig. 1. A Location of the Bu zios Field in the context of South America. The red polygon delimitates the pre-salt limits. B Location of the Bu zios, Tupi, Sapinhoa , and Lapa fields. C Location of the study area. The orange polygon delineates the study area. Green dots represent the public well-logs available from ANP. Source the authors. 2 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 the conventional data or materials as an indicator of the presence of hydrocarbons Abdullah et al., 2005 in Pamungkas et al., 2021 . In this context, the attributes defined as instantaneous are computed sample by sample, and represent instantaneous variations of several parameters. Instantaneous values of attributes such as trace envelope, its derivatives, frequency, sweetness, and phase may be determined from complex traces Taner, 2001 . The calculation of the instantaneous attributes is based on the conversion of the real-valued input traces into complex-valued traces based on the Hilbert transform. The output of this operation is amplitude waveform envelope or absolute value of the analytic signal , phase the argument of the complex-valued trace , frequency the scaled time derivative of the instantaneous phase , and sweetness instantaneous amplitude divided by the square root of instantaneous frequency DUG, 2020 . Multi-attribute analyses have been used to characterize pre and postsalt petroleum systems. For example, Silva 2012 applied seismic at tributes instantaneous frequency, RMS amplitude, integrated trace, cosine phase, and amplitude envelope combined with well data and the inversion techniques for the delimitation and the characterization of a complex reservoir system from the tertiary turbidite channels located in the Lower Basin of Congo. Artificial intelligence can also support the use of seismic attributes in reservoir identification and prediction of the environment of deposition. Obafemi et al. 2020 integrated two lith ofacies and fluid-discriminating seismic attributes via an unsupervised artificial neural network to characterize the architecture of deepwater turbidite channels and submarine fan lobes across a hydrocarbon-bearing reservoir within the Frem Field in the Niger Delta. Souza 2021 characterized the southeast portion of the hydrocarbon producer basin of Taranaki, New Zealand. This research is anchored in two independent attributes curvature and coherence, which proved efficient in delineating structural and stratigraphic discontinuities, such as channels, faults and fractures, and seismic facies. The use of multi-attributes enhances and accelerates the process of seismic interpretation. In the Campos Basin, Schmidt 2013 employed Maximum Ampli tude, Maximum Magnitude e RMS Amplitude to characterize the car bonate reservoir of the Bonito Field. Considering the heterogeneous carbonate rocks from the Brazilian pre-salt layers, the amplitude attri butes provided the most distinguishable seismic response. To the south of the Santos Basin, the use of instantaneous seismic attributes such as envelope, phase, and instantaneous frequency has facilitated the inter pretation of 2D post-stack seismic sections, leading to the identification of gas hydrate indicators in the Pelotas Basin Dias et al., 2019 . In the central part of the Santos Basin, multiple seismic attributes combined with machine learning algorithms are used to identify strati fications within the salt layer, showing that the correct facies identifi cation allows adjusting the drilling parameters accordingly to the estimated salt type, minimizing operational problems and economic losses Mesquita et al., 2021 . Ferreira et al. 2021 propose using an unsupervised artificial neural network algorithm to perform seismic facies classification in the Bu zios Field. This research was based on a unique combination of stratigraphic and structural attributes local flatness, principal dip component, acoustic impedance, and RMS amplitude. The latter two attributes were essential for the delimitation of the carbonate platform facies, while the first and second ones were essential to discriminate the debris and build-up facies. As the vast majority of recent studies focus solely on the reservoir of the Bu zios Field, there is a noticeable lack of published research con cerning the stratigraphic, geometric, and spatial relationships of the other units that comprise the geological framework of this area. Therefore, this research aims to address this gap by examining the comprehensive geological framework of the region, encompassing various units and their interconnections. This broad approach will contribute to a more thorough understanding of the geological evolution and potential reservoir characteristics in the Bu zios Field area. In this case, this study proposes a three-dimensional investigation of the features observed throughout the geological framework of the Santos Basin in the Bu zios Field area. In this paper, we propose a quantitative and qualitative classification of seismic facies using multi-attribute analysis allied to the integration of well logs in the Bu zios Field to characterize three-dimensionally the geological framework of the area within the Santos Basin. The study also aims to reconstitute the basin s tectonostratigraphic evolution in the context of the South Atlantic Ocean opening by unraveling the relationship between the geological units and its seismic response. This research has the potential to contribute to the future development of more concise, predictive, and detailed geological models for oil exploration in the basin. 2. Location and geological framework The Santos Basin Fig. 1 is a passive margin basin related to the Gondwana breakup event during the Neocominian. The tectonic evo lution of this basin is divided into three mega-sequences rift, post-rift sag , and drift presented in Fig. 2 Mio et al., 2005 Moreira et al., 2007 . The Camboriu , Pic arras, and Itapema formations represent the rift stage, related to the separation of South-American and African paleocontinents during the end of Neocomian and the beginning of Aptian and are responsible for initiating the lacustrine deposition Moreira et al., 2007 . The post-rift or sag sequence represents a transitional stage from continental to marine environment with softer tectonics during the Aptian Moreira et al., 2007 . This transitional stage is represented by the non-marine and shallow-water carbonates of the Barra Velha For mation and the thick overlying evaporite seal of the Ariri Formation Buckley et al., 2015 . The last phase of the Santos Basin evolution is the continental drift, responsible for the installation of a well-established basin associated with the opening of the Atlantic Ocean since the Albian Moreira et al., 2007 . This mega-sequence is related to thermal subsidence associated with halokinesis and is subdivided into three sequences deposited dur ing a progressive increase of the basin depth the Camburi, Frade, and Itamambuca groups. The first one is a result of the rising sea level and is represented by the lower Floriano polis, Guaruja , and lower Itanhae m formations. The Frade Group represents a marine regression stage where the coastline has advanced up to 200 km towards the continent. The end of the drift phase is marked by the prograding system of the Itamambuca Group with expressive development of clinoforms of slope and the advance of the platform break-up Milani et al., 2000 Moreira et al., 2007 Papaterra, 2010 . The Bu zios Field, located in the central portion of the Santos Basin Fig. 1 , is one of the most productive fields in the area. In the Bu zios Field area, the rift mega-sequence begins with the extrusion of the Camboriu Formation continental basalts, which are interlayered with volcaniclastic rocks, as shown in composite log registers 3-BRSA-1053RJS . The rift mega-sequence is heavily influenced by tectonics and is divided into upper and lower sequences. The lower sequence is char acterized by the Pic arras Formation, which exhibits the greatest devel opment of sedimentary wedges with thickening towards the hanging wall, reaching thicknesses of up to 2200 m. The upper sequence corre sponds to the Itapema Formation, which includes the coquinas sec tion , consisting of a thick package up to 300 m of bivalve rudstones and, to a lesser extent, bioclastic grainstones, packstones, wackstones, mudstones, and shales that were deposited in high-energy environments Tavares dos Santos and Gordon, 2021 . Regarding the post-rift mega-sequence, the carbonates of the Barra Velha Formation in the Bu zios Field occur in various facies, such as Mgrich clays stevensite , shrubs, spherulites, and fine-grained carbonates. These carbonates range in thickness from approximately 200 to 400 m at structural highs Tavares dos Santos and Gordon, 2021 Ferreira, 2022 . The basal and upper portions of the Barra Velha Formation are domi nated by fine-grained carbonate sediments, while intermediate portion is dominated by in-situ carbonate sedimentation, with shrubs and 3 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Fig. 2. Simplified stratigraphic chart for Santos Basin. Adapted from Moreira et al. 2007 in Arai and Viviers 2013 . spherulites Ferreira, 2022 . The salt structures of the Ariri Formation reach thicknesses of up to 2650 m in the central portion of the Bu zios Field, with decreasing thickness towards the north and south, forming salt windows or scars . The stratification of the evaporites begins with the precipitation of anhydrite at the base, followed by a thick package of halite, which is the most common evaporite deposit of this oil field Tavares dos Santos and Gordon, 2021 . The drift mega-sequence in the Bu zios Field area begins with thin microbial carbonate deposits of the Guaruja Formation, which consists mainly of fine-grained carbonates mudstone and calcilutite deposited in distal restricted marine conditions with typical thicknesses ranging from 10 to 30 m. Overlying the Guaruja Formation, the Itanhae m For mation is composed of marls and intercalated shales, with a local expression in the vicinity of the 3-BRSA-1053-RJS well. Composite logs 3-BRSA-1053-RJS, 3-BRSA-1064-RJS reveal thick layers of sandstone interleaved with shales and minor marls from the Itajai -Ac u Formation, exhibiting a coarsening-up sequence up to 430 m thick. The Marambaia Formation, which consists of a thick package approximately 650 m of shales and sandstones, was deposited in open marine conditions from Eodanian to recent times Moreira et al., 2007 . Structurally, the post-salt deposits in the Bu zios area are fully controlled by halokinesis Tavares dos Santos and Gordon, 2021 . The pre-salt petroleum system of the Bu zios Field is composed of the source shales of the Pic arras Formation, while the reservoir rocks are encompassed by the coquinas from the Itapema Formation and the Barra Velha carbonates. The Ariri Formation s evaporite cover works as the system s seal, while the whole drift mega-sequence consists of the overburden rocks Chang et al., 2008 . 3. Methods and materials The Bu zios Field is covered by 2586 km2 of 3D post-stack depth migrated seismic PSDM which encompasses gamma-ray, density, Psonic, and resistivity logs from forty wells Fig. 3 . Our work focused on 715 km2 of the 3D PSDM seismic and six wells, with depth interval from 2000 to 9995 m. 3.1. Seismic interpretation We interpreted five key horizons and the main faults in a grid of 17 inlines and 28 crosslines with spacing varying from 500 m to 2000 m Fig. 3 . We first traced the faults, then the well-marked horizons with good lateral continuity and high illumination, supporting on the well data. To trace the deepest and the less continuous horizons, it was 4 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Fig. 3. Location map of the study area and dataset used for this work. Source the authors. necessary to use seismic attributes in addition to the seismic images and logs. The attributes used in this work are described below. attribute was calculated by the ratio instantaneous amplitude over the square root of instantaneous frequency, according to Oliveros and Radovich 1999 Semblance similarity geometrical attribute which is also used as a good indicator of lateral continuity and bedding similarity Taner, 2001 . It was obtained by the equations presented by Marfurt et al. 1998 . Instantaneous amplitude attribute sensitive to major lithologic changes and lateral variations in bed thicknesses. It was extracted using the method of complex trace analysis proposed by Taner et al. 1979 Instantaneous phase physical attribute effectively used as a discriminator for geometrical shape classification which works as a good indicator of lateral continuity Taner, 2001 . It can be calcu lated as proposed by Taner et al. 1979 Instantaneous sweetness highlights large differences in acoustic impedance and is highly sensitive to frequency variation. The 3.2. Well-log analysis Data from forty well logs were organized, processed, and standard ized. Most of the available well logs are in DLIS format Digital Log Interchange Standard , which is incompatible with the software used. 5 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 4.1. Recognition and classification of the seismic patterns seismic facies Therefore, the profiles were converted from DLIS to LAS Log ASCII Standard format. The next step was to standardize the density g cm3 , gamma-rays GAPI , P slowness s ft , and resistivity ohm.m curves. They were unified and the class, scale of tracks, and colors of each curve were adjusted. Six of the forty available well logs were selected to be analyzed Fig. 3 . A priori, the main criteria for wells selection was vertical sampling so that the curves covered the greatest possible interval in depth. Secondly, it was the availability of a composite log. In this way, the selected wells were 2-ANP-1-RJS, 3-BRSA-1053-RJS, 8-BUZ-20-RJS, 8-BUZ-21D-RJS, 8-BUZ-26-RJS, and 8-BUZ-28DA-RJS. The curves were processed by a smoothing filter which uses the method of a trimmed mean of the middle N values in the window, where N is the window trimmed by 25 , i.e. the average of the middle 75 of the values, excluding the upper 12.5 and lower 12.5 of the sorted values. The statistical analysis consists of a calculation of maximum and minimum values, the average mean, and the standard deviation of the four curves in the interval of each key seismic unit described in the following section. To better understand the three-dimensional framework and the tec tonostratigraphic evolution of the Santos Basin, six seismic units were identified with distinct characteristics throughout the study area Fig. 4 . These units, designated as A, B, C, D, E, and F, were differen tiated using the well logs, the seismic amplitude analysis and the instantaneous amplitude, phase, sweetness, and semblance similarity volumes Fig. 5 . Unit A is topped by horizon 1 depicted in pink in Figs. 4 and 5 , which occurs at an average depth of 7500 m. The contact with the overlying Unit B can be either tectonic when the unit is disrupted by normal faults or lithological unconformity. This unit is mainly charac terized by weak or absent reflectors that lack continuity and illumina tion, making it challenging to define its boundaries. Consequently, the use of seismic attributes is crucial for accurate delineation. The instan taneous amplitude attribute shows a homogeneous white pattern, sug gesting a massive composition Fig. 5-A . The most effective attribute for discriminating Unit A is the instantaneous phase, which reveals a chaotic pattern indicating a lack of lateral continuity Feature 1 in Fig. 5B . However, defining the top of this unit posed significant challenges due to the limited seismic resolution at great depths. The instantaneous sweetness attribute indicates values near zero, suggesting the absence of notable structures or lithologic variations Fig. 5-C . Finally, the semblance attribute displays a dark pattern, indicating high dissimi larity with the surrounding area Fig. 5-D . 4. Results The results are categorized into four sections as described below seismic pattern identification, analysis of identified structures, well-log analysis, and creation of a three-dimensional model. Fig. 4. Results of the seismic interpretation of IL 3408. A Non-interpreted and B interpreted seismic line IL3408 . The dotted boxes highlight important features F1 to F16 described in the text. Letters A, B, C, D, E, and F refer to the interpreted units. Source the authors. 6 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Fig. 5. Results of the seismic interpretation of IL 3408. A Instantaneous amplitude, B instantaneous phase, C instantaneous sweetness, and D semblance attributes for IL4308 are also presented. The dotted boxes highlight important features F1 to F16 described in the text. Source the authors. 7 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Horizon 2 shown in orange in Figs. 4 and 5 delineates the upper boundary of Unit B. This surface occurs at an average depth of 5950 m. Unit B is characterized by a pattern of reflectors that range from divergent or oblique parallel to locally chaotic at the footwalls base, with high amplitude, medium to low illumination, and intermediate lateral continuity Fig. 4-A and B . It displays a wedge-shaped geometry. In areas where the horsts of Unit A are located, there is a decrease in layer thickness. Regarding seismic attributes, the instantaneous amplitude does not exhibit a well-defined pattern, but dark features parallel to the base of the unit horizon 1 are observed, interleaved with a white chaotic re gion Feature 2 in Fig. 5-A . The instantaneous phase attribute distin guishes units A and B well, with a change from a chaotic pattern to a divergent and oblique parallel one that evidences good lateral continuity of the reflectors Feature 3 in Fig. 5-B . Unit B predominantly displays high sweetness in dark blue with minor intercalations of low sweetness in yellow to red parallel to the top of the unit horizon 2, Fig. 5-C . Semblance is predominantly high and highlights the reflectors diver gent pattern and inclination Fig. 5-D . Unit C is bounded at the top by horizon 3 shown in green in Figs. 4 and 5 , which occurs at an average depth of 5700 m. This unit is sepa rated from Unit B by a significant discontinuity, which marks the change in the divergent pattern to a planar-parallel one Fig. 4-A and B . The surface used as the base marker is a horizon with very high illumination and negative amplitude, where an onlapping feature is observed. Another important feature is the occurrence of mounds at the top of the unit. Instantaneous amplitude and sweetness do not provide a clear response for this unit, resulting in a highly homogeneous pattern Fig. 5A and B . The instantaneous phase shows a discrete change in pattern compared to Unit B, marked by an increase in bed thickness expressed by the increase of the distance between two consecutive reflectors Fig. 5-C . Semblance exhibits a gradual change from planar-parallel white to chaotic dark-blue black patterns toward the N-NW. The white portion of high similarity indicates a homogeneous composition, while the dark portion indicates abrupt structural variation Feature 4 in Fig. 5-D . The top of Unit D is marked by Horizon 4 in blue in Figs. 4 and 5. This horizon ranges in depth from 2490 m to 6330 m, with an average depth of 3550 m. The thickness of this unit decreases towards the NW, resulting in direct contact between units C and F Feature 5 in Fig. 4-B . The seismic response of this unit is highly heterogeneous, displaying three main patterns without stratification Feature 6 in Fig. 4-B , with little marked stratification Feature 7 in Fig. 4-B , and with well-marked stratification Feature 8 in Fig. 4-B . The deepest domain lacks stratifi cation and has chaotic to absent reflectors. The intermediate domain typically exhibits a chaotic to wavy seismic pattern with weak stratifi cation, while the shallowest domain has well-marked stratification characterized by wavy to plane-parallel reflectors, high amplitude, high illumination, and low lateral continuity. Generally, the stratification of this unit is parallel to the irregular surface of its top. Instantaneous amplitude strongly emphasizes Horizon 4, revealing a well-marked dark surface indicating an abrupt lithologic variation Fig. 5-A . This attribute also confirms the existence of a stratified portion at the top of Unit D, as shown by the alternation of wavy dark and light regions. The domain without stratification is marked by a relatively homogeneous white pattern, resulting in low amplitude en velope values. The instantaneous phase attribute effectively highlights the domain without stratification due to its chaotic pattern and lack of continuity Fig. 5-B . The domain with well-marked stratification dis plays intermediate to good lateral continuity. Instantaneous sweetness highlights a chaotic pattern with low to medium sweetness in the center of Unit D, contoured by layers with high sweetness parallel to Horizon 4 Feature 9 in Fig. 5-C . Semblance provides visualization of stratified areas adjacent to the top, highlighted by light-blue to white segments in the flanks of antiforms and black in the hinges Fig. 5-D . Horizon 5 dark blue in Figs. 4 and 5 marks the top of Unit E, which surface ranges in depth from 2910 m to 4290 m, with an average depth of 3290 m. This unit displays a heterogeneous seismic pattern, charac terized by intermediate amplitude and illumination but high lateral continuity Fig. 4-A and B . Near the base, the reflectors tend to follow the underlying unit topography and fill mini-basins between the Unit D domes Feature 10 in Fig. 4-B . In these regions, the unit exhibits a wavy pattern with onlapping terminations, where reflectors are thick at the depocentre and thinner as it moves away from the center. On the steepest slopes, Unit E has a chaotic pattern, while towards the top, the reflectors are plane-parallel. Interweaved mound-like features with wavy to plane-parallel internal reflectors Fig. 6 occur in the north portion of the study area. The unit is generally intensely deformed and crossed by multiple sets of normal faults. The instantaneous amplitude attribute reveals the existence of expressive surfaces marked by black color parallel to the unit stratifi cation and a mound-shaped feature in the north Feature 11 in Fig. 5-A . The instantaneous phase effectively enhances the wavy to plane-parallel pattern and the high lateral continuity of the reflectors. Next to the base of the hanging walls, this attribute shows a chaotic pattern Feature 12 in Fig. 5-B . Sweetness shows the intercalation of thick layers of high, medium, and low sweetness at the top and a heterogeneous pattern composed of medium to low sweetness where the mound-like features occur Fig. 5-C . Semblance also reveals the plane-parallel and wavy patterns, but it highlights little disruption marked by dark patches into the medium to high semblance reflectors Feature 13 in Fig. 5-D . Seismic unit F is characterized by a parallel configuration, with wellmarked flat reflectors that exhibit a plane-parallel configuration, high illumination, low amplitude, and high lateral continuity Fig. 4-A and B . It differs from the underlying unit E by the intensity of deformation. An important feature observed throughout the study area is an erosive surface at the top of Unit E at depths lower than 2500 m Feature 14 in Fig. 4-A . This surface is curved and locally undulated and is marked by an abrupt disruption of reflectors. The instantaneous amplitude better discriminates between units E and F, with the latter presenting a homogeneous plane-parallel pattern marked by alternating high black , medium grey , and low white reflectivity. This attribute also reveals the great lateral continuity and relatively constant thickness of layers Feature 15 in Fig. 5-A . The instantaneous phase attribute highlights the great lateral continuity and distinguishes units E and F by the decrease of reflector thickness in the latter Fig. 5-B . Moreover, sweetness shows a distinct intercalation of thin layers of high, medium, and low sweetness Fig. 5-C . Semblance outlines the plane-parallel pattern predominantly formed by white layers high similarity , with dark areas around faults and structural highs of Unit D Feature 16 in Fig. 5-D . Fig. 7 summarizes the six aforementioned seismic patterns, where the main characteristics of each unit are presented with their respective instantaneous amplitude, instantaneous phase, sweetness, and semblance attributes. 4.2. Analysis of the identified structures The studied area can be divided into two structural domains, deep and shallow ones, separated by horizon 3 Figs. 8 and 9, respectively . Both domains consist of normal faults, in which the deep structures display NE-SW azimuth roughly parallel to the Brazilian coastline and dip between 50 and 80 , and the shallow structures have E-W to NW-SE azimuth and dip between 30 and 60 . The deep structures consist of five main normal faults with curved surfaces, which occur below 5000 m depth. In the 3D model, they are discriminated by different colors green, pink, red, dark blue, and yellow Fig. 8 . Two main faults are N S trending green and pink ones dipping about 50 60 to W and occurs in the central portion of the Bu zios Field. In the NE region of the study area, the pink fault is deflected towards NESW, and its dip angle decrease. The red fault trends to the NE-SW di rection and dips 60 80 to NW. The fault represented in dark blue also 8 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Fig. 6. A Non-interpreted, and B interpreted seismic section showing the mound-shaped features observed in units E and F, exhibiting a wavy to a plane-parallel internal pattern. Source the authors. Fig. 7. Summary of the described seismic patterns, showing instantaneous amplitude, instantaneous phase, sweetness, and semblance attributes for units A to F. Source the authors. trends to NE-SW but it dips about 70 to SE. The yellow fault is trending approximately W-E and dips 60 65 to the north. All of these faults cross units A and B, and only the yellow one crosses units A, B, and C, reaching the base of Unit D. The set of these structures forms grabens, half-grabens, and horsts. When half-graben geometries occur, the blocks are slightly tilted to NE. The group formed by the shallow structures consists of nine major normal faults which occur above 5000 m depth. The major faults are also discriminated by colors according to Fig. 9. The fault colored in pink dips 40 -55 S and has a curved surface, its direction is approximately EW with a deflection towards NW, where occurs a thick dome from Unit D. The group formed by the parallel normal faults marked in purple, light blue, and light green has the same E-W deflected to NW trend, but the opposite dip direction 40 -55 N , which may represent a conjugate pair with the pink fault. Other conjugate pairs occur towards S-SE, coinciding with the unit D highs. In the central portion, the conjugate pair formed by the yellow and dark red faults also contours the Unit D domes and has the same E-W deflection around the dome. The dark red fault dips 30 50 to the north and exhibits the largest vertical slip up to 600 m Fig. 10 and outlines the horizon 5 geometry, consequently conditioning Unit E and the lower portion of Unit F thickness. Fig. 10 shows this great displacement and the tilting of blocks of units E and F to 9 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Fig. 8. Set of deep structures. The map on the left represents a depth slice of 6680 m within the study area orange polygon . On the right, the 3-D visualization of the deep mapped faults and horizon 1. Source the authors. Fig. 9. Set of shallow structures. The map on the left represents a depth slice of 2800 m within the study area orange polygon . On the right, a 3-D visualization of the shallow structures crossing horizon 5. Source the authors. S-SE. The yellow fault, conjugated to the dark red fault, dips 30 to 45 S. Towards the SE region, a set formed by the parallel dark green and or ange faults exhibits a W-E trend and dips about 45 60 to the north. At last, the brown fault located at the southern portion of the study area has the same direction and dip as the dark green and orange ones, but a more constrained lateral expression. Additionally, transtractive features e.g. negative flower structures were observed at the top of the Unit D highs. In general, semblance is the seismic attribute that better highlights these faults by black lines which mark high dissimilarity. Under the surface of erosion observed in Unit F, it is possible to observe other associated structures, such as drag folds that form a syn clinal right under the fault plane pink fault, Fig. 11 . The synclinal configures a normal drag in the hanging wall of the normal fault. A detachment surface green line in Fig. 11-B less inclined than the associated fault is formed right below the drag fold. understand and reconstruct the tectonostratigraphic evolution of the Bu zios Field and contribute to the understanding of the evolution of the Santos Basin. Starting from Unit A, it is common to observe half-grabens, grabens, and horsts delimited by normal faults. Towards N-NW, this unit is deeper due to the presence of half-grabens constrained by faults dip ping to N-NW. The opposite behavior is observed towards S-SE, in which Unit A forms structural highs, shaping the adjacent unit Fig. 12 . Unit B has a relatively heterogeneous geometry with variable thickness, conditioned by the grabens and horsts formed by Unit A. The isopach map Fig. 13-A shows thickness varying from approximately 300 to 2900 m. The lowest thickness 50 m is observed in the south portion of the study area, where Unit A forms an expressive horst. There is an expressive thickening towards N-NW, following the topography created by the normal faults that cross units A, B, and the base of Unit C. Unit C has a relatively constant thickness, ranging from approxi mately 50 to 600 m, with an average mean thickness of around 300 m. From the isopach map Fig. 13-B , it is evident that there is a slight variation in thickness across the study area, with a tendency to thicken towards the S-SE. The top and base surfaces of the unit are mainly regular horizons with a slight downward flexure towards the NE in the 4.3. Threedimensional geological model After describing these six seismofacies with two-dimensional sec tions, it is essential to analyze their three-dimensional arrangement to 10 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Fig. 10. Region with the largest vertical slip observed. A Non-interpreted, and B interpreted seismic section. The white arrows indicate the sense of relative displacement. Letters A, B, C, D, E, and F refer to units A, B, C, D, E, and F, respectively. Source the authors. southeast part of the Bu zios Field. Some of the normal faults described in section 4.2 this work cause uplifts of the underlying units A and B, forming structural highs next to the base of the unit. Unit D exhibits significant variation in thickness and morphologies Figs. 12 and 13-C . Its thickness ranges from 0 to approximately 3300 m. In the northern part of the study area, the unit is thin 0 300 m and lies between steep and thick domes and diapirs with thicknesses of approximately 2900 m that form complex ellipsoidal-like morphologies see Figs. 12 and 13-C . In the north region, it is observed steep relief domes and walls with relatively flat tops with about 12 km of extension, and associated small shallow depressions Feature 1 in Fig. 14-B . In NW of the Bu zios Field, windows or scars occur in association with an expressive thinning of Unit D Feature 2 in Fig. 14-B . Pillows are also observed in the vicinity of these scars Feature 3 in Fig. 14-B . Towards SE, the unit s topography gets more irregular, with the alternation of thick anticlinals and synclinals features Feature 4 in Fig. 14-B . In the southeast, gravitational collapse features are observed. Shallow faults described in item 4.2 follow these thin and round-shaped portions. This behavior is consistent across the unit s extensions, although the thick ness is less variable towards the S-SE, where domes are less steep and thickness ranges from approximately 800 to 2700 m. Unit D is consid erably thicker in this area, and the topography is slightly less irregular. The isopach map of Unit E shows a counter mold to the thickness of Unit D Fig. 13-D . Where Unit D is thin in the north , Unit E is thicker up to 3600 m . In the central part of the study area, Unit E exhibits an average thickness of approximately 700 m. Remarkably, thin regions of Unit E follow the trace of the shallow faults. In the south, Unit E has a relatively constant thickness of about 1000 m. The top surface of the unit horizon 5 is predominantly flat but discontinuous due to the presence of dip-slip faults. Unit F is characterized by a relatively constant thickness of approx imately 500 m Fig. 13-E with minor variations in proximity to fault 11 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Fig. 11. A Drag fold formed under the pink fault plane pointed by a red arrow. B Detailed view of the detachment surface dark green line in the right figure formed below the drag fold. Source the authors. zones. On the other hand, notable differences in thickness are observed along the Unit D lows, which host mini-basins of Unit E. When the Unit D lows overlap with fault zones, the thickness of this package usually in creases significantly, reaching up to 1800 m. period of basin evolution characterized by mechanical extension. It is also reflected in stratigraphic features that indicate syn-depositional fault movement. The post-rift term denotes any strata that form after the active extensional tectonics. Based on the evidence of the initial stages of the rifting process, such as grabens and half-grabens, Unit A was classified as Syn-Rift I phase. It is important to note that volcanic rocks can also represent a pre-rift stage, such as in the Southern Red Sea, Yemen, where an astheno spheric plume occurs cf. Mitchell et al., 1992 . Unit B also displays seismic patterns consistent with syn-rift tec tonics, as demonstrated by Prosser 1993, Fig. 17 , and we interpreted it as a Syn-Rift II stage. In the study area, these features take the form of wedge-shaped geometry created by divergent reflectors with an oblique parallel configuration Fig. 18 . Additionally, the portions of Unit B that exhibit the divergent and oblique parallel pattern with the classic wedge-shaped configuration may represent the initiation of the rift. The divergence of reflectors may be a consequence of syn-tectonic deposition Kuchle, 2010 . The chaotic pattern observed near the base of the footwall slope can be associated with the climax stage and suggests aggradation. Unit C was interpreted as a Post-Rift I stage due to the change from the divergent to a plane-parallel pattern, indicating the transition from syn-rift to post-rift phase, according to Bosence 1998 . In the post-rift phase, the filling of the basin is characterized by aggradational and progradational geometries, which surfaces dip in the direction of the increase of the accommodation space in the center of the basin. The horizontal and plane parallel configuration of Unit C reflectors could represent a reflex of its deposition after intense tectonic activity Kuchle, 2010 . Although the base of Unit C is affected by some of the normal faults, it was not interpreted as a part of the syn-rift section. This feature was considered a posterior reactivation of the syn-rift faulting. Macedo et al. 2021 argue the faults that affect the top of the post-rift or sag section indicate the tectonic activity is, at least locally, controlling the post-rift sedimentation in the Bu zios Field area. Unit D was interpreted as the saline section of the Santos Basin, representing a Post-Rift II stage. This unit was interpreted as post-rift once it was not affected by the normal faults associated with the rift phase. Mitchell et al. 1992 describe syn-rift evaporites Red Sea Yemen , where the salt section is intensely controlled by the rift faults, contrary to what we observed in the study area. The domain without stratification of Unit D was interpreted as a halite-rich portion, with predominantly massive composition, without pervasive structures such as bedding or foliation. Unit E and F represent the establishment of the passive margin of the 4.4. Well-log analysis and statistics The analyzed log intervals of units B, C, D, E, and F are separated by the horizons 2, 3, 4, and 5, respectively. Fig. 15 presents the location of 2-ANP-1-RJS, 3-BRSA-1053-RJS, 8-BUZ-20-RJS, 8-BUZ-26-RJS, and 8BUZ-28DA-RJS wells in the seismic sections. The gamma-rays GAPI , density g cm3 , P-sonic s ft , and resistivity ohm.m curves general behavior is described in the following paragraphs Fig. 16 . Analyzing the behavior of the gamma-ray logs, units E and F exhibit the highest values, varying from 10 to 211 GAPI. Unit D shows the lowest values of GR, with expressive intercalations of peaks of high signal up to 200 GAPI . Units B and C present low to intermediate values of gamma-ray, which range from 0 to 61 GAPI. Unit D has the lowest average density, varying from 2.06 to 2.17 g cm3, while units B and C exhibit the highest average mean from 2.46 to 2.59 g cm3 . The behavior of P-wave slowness curves discriminates three major patterns from top to bottom units high, intermediate, and low slowness. Unit E has the highest average slowness, ranging from 99 to 125 us ft. Unit D presents the intermediate slowness pattern, with the average mean be tween 68 and 70 us ft. Units B and C exhibit the lowest average P-Sonic values, varying from 57 to 64 us ft. At last, resistivity curves provided abrupt changes between units D and E, and units C and D. The highest average mean is observed in Unit D up to 2590 .m , while the lowest is presented by units E and F from 1 to 42 .m . At wells 8-BUZ-26-RJS Fig. 16-E and 8-BUZ-28DA-RJS Fig. 16-F , there is an important decrease in resistivity at approximately 5800 m. All the results for minimum, maximum, average mean, and standard deviation are pre sented in Table 1. 5. Discussions 5.1. Interpreted units in the context of a marine rift basin and its tectonic components To incorporate the interpreted seismic units into the geological his tory of the Santos Basin, it is necessary to correlate these units to the tectonic compartments of a marine rift basin. Firstly, it is important to comprehend some tectonostratigraphic models, particularly the ones presented in Bosence 1998 . This model describes the term syn-rift as a 12 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Fig. 12. A 3D model of the interpreted horizons 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 in the depth domain. B Map view with the location of the analyzed wells and the seismic lines IL 4327 and Cl 4000. C Inline IL4327 and D crossline CL4000 views. Source the authors. 13 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Fig. 13. Isopach maps from A Unit B, B Unit C, D Unit E, D Unit E, and E Unit F showing the lateral variation of thickness. Source the authors. 14 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Fig. 14. A Non-interpreted, and B interpreted seismic line IL 4327 showing the main structures observed along Unit D. The red dotted boxes highlight important features F1 to F4 described in the text. Letters A, B, C, D, E, and F refer to the interpreted units. Source the authors. Santos Basin. Unit E is interpreted as synchronous with the beginning of continental drift, representing a Drift I phase, while Unit F is conceived as a posterior stage Drift II . The major criterion for discriminating between units E and F is the amount of deformation since Unit E is intensely deformed by the upward movement of the underlying package. Consequently, Unit E is understood as syn-halokinesis, while the unit F is interpreted as posterior, mainly affected by predominantly extensional tensions in the continental drift process. The instantaneous amplitude attribute reveals the existence of expressive surfaces marked by the black color parallel to the unit stratification, which probably marks smaller cycles of stratification in the context of the basin opening. opening begins with the deposition of the continental basalts of the Syn-Rift I stage, related to the Camboriu Formation between the end of Valanginian and Barremian. Although this unit is not identified by any of the wells, this correlation was made exclusively by the seismic expression of the unit chaotic to absent reflectors and what is regionally known as the economic basement of the Santos Basin. The Syn-Rift II unit was deposited as the extensional stresses continued to act on the basin. In this context, the basin infill consists of alluvial fan sediments in the proximal portions and lacustrine lithologies in the distal portion, deposited from the Barremian to the Eo-Aptian. Analyzing the behavior of the logs in the interval of Syn-Rift II unit Unit B , the major difference consists of the gamma-ray and resistivity curves. There is an abrupt change in the pattern of these curves in the transition from Unit C and Unit B, especially in 8-BUZ-21D-RJS and 8BUZ-26-RJS wells. Horizon 2 is marked by a peak in GR values from 50 to 88 GAPI . The peaks with higher values of gamma-ray can be associated with the presence of shales with Mg-clays described in the Itapema Formation. In some wells, significant increases in the GR values were identified during the transition from the Itapema Formation to the Barra Velha Formation. Castro 2019 also associates these peaks with 5.2. Interpreted units in the stratigraphic context of the Santos Basin In the attempt to understand how the seismic expression of the interpreted unit is linked to the geological framework of the Santos Basin, the analysis of the selected well logs was the main tool to correlate the units with the regional and local stratigraphy described in Moreira et al. 2007 . Here we present a description of the well registers from the lower Unit B to the upper unit Unit F . As aforementioned, the rifting 15 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Fig. 15. Location of wells 2-ANP-1-RJS, 3-BRSA-1053-RJS, 8-BUZ-20-RJS, 8-BUZ-26-RJS, and 8-BUZ-28DA-RJS in the seismic sections A IL4100, B IL4160, C CL2150, and D CL3810. Source the authors. 16 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Fig. 16. Gamma-ray in GAPI , density in g cm3 , P-Sonic in us ft , and resistivity in ohm. m logs in A 2-ANP-1-RJS, B 3-BRSA-1053-RJS, C 8-BUZ-20-RJS, D 8-BUZ-21D-RJS, E 8-BUZ-26-RJS, and F 8-BUZ-28DA-RJS wells. Letters from B, C, D, E, and F refer to units B, C, D, E, and F, respectively. Source the authors. 17 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Table 1 Results for minimum, maximum, average mean, and standard deviation obtained for gamma-ray, density, P-sonic, and resistivity curves per unit. UNIT B Syn-Rift II C Post-Rift I D Post-Rift II E Drift I F Drift II Gamma-Ray GAPI Filter Trimmed mean 25 Min Max Mean Std dev Min Max Mean Std dev Min Max Mean Std dev Min Max Mean Std dev Min Max Mean Std dev 6.9 15.1 61.3 139.2 20.1 40.5 9.6 27.5 0 14.3 41.2 61.3 17.8 30.9 5.4 11.7 0 13.7 108.4 208.4 14.6 44.0 10.7 25.3 10.0 24.0 64.0 211.3 43.4 58.7 9.0 16.6 11.7 31.9 57.9 77.9 38.6 50.5 7.7 12.3 Density g cm3 P-Sonic us ft Resistivity Ohm.m 2.06 2.44 2.59 2.71 2.47 2.57 0.03 0.11 2.10 2.45 2.64 2.87 2.46 2.59 0.04 0.12 1.52 1.62 2.90 4.63 2.06 2.17 0.20 0.50 1.20 1.88 2.93 2.96 2.27 2.37 0.18 0.19 49.2 57.3 65.7 120.4 57.8 63.4 2.0 13.5 48.7 54.1 64.1 80.8 57.1 64.2 2.5 6.7 51.2 55.4 86.4 154.2 67.7 69.9 3.4 7.2 52.6 57.2 107.8 160.0 99.3 125.1 8.0 20.1 0.7 7.1 128.0 1950.0 19.6 435.2 20.0 491.5 0.9 64.1 1331.7 10,530.3 246.5 1427.0 246.0 2225.8 0.9 24.3 5000.0 5012.4 1.8 2590.0 899.6 1979.4 0.2 0.3 15.1 4995.3 0.88 41.8 1.1 369.1 0.5 0.7 0.8 0.9 0.7 0.8 0 0.1 Fig. 17. A Seismic section of a Barents Sea half-graben. B Interpreted seismic section showing the stages of rift evolution on a half-graben. S1 is the pre-rift stage, S2 is the rift initiation stage, S3 is the rift climax, and S4 corresponds to the post-rift stage. S2 is characterized by wedge-shaped geometry created by divergent re flectors. S3 consists of the development of divergent forms related to continued tilting of the hanging-wall during deposition. S4 is marked by a reflector package with a simple parallel infill. Extracted from Prosser 1993 . shales of the Itapema Formation in some wells, while in others, they are associated with organic-rich mudstones or carbonates of the Barra Velha Formation. In this work, the entire Syn-Rift II unit is correlated to the Itapema Pic arras interval. Assuming the Syn-Rift II unit represents the Pic arras and Itapema formations, the overlying package Post-Rift I unit corresponds to the Barra Velha Formation. This moment represents the beginning of the transition from a continental to a shallow marine environment. The Barra Velha carbonates are assumed to have been deposited in a shallow alkaline lake, from the hyperextension of the lithosphere and increased geothermal gradients to levels favorable for the generation of alkali-rich brines Farias et al., 2019 . In the transition between the Post-Rift I unit Unit C and the other units Syn-Rift II and Post-Rift II , all the analyzed curves exhibit an abrupt change in the pattern. 18 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Fig. 18. Detailed view of inline 4375. A Non-interpreted, and B interpreted seismic profile. The dotted polygon highlights a half-graben exhibiting a wedge-shaped geometry, with oblique-parallel internal reflectors in Syn-Rift I unit and sub-parallel to plane-parallel reflectors in the Post-Rift I unit. Letters A, B, C, D, E, and F refer to units A, B, C, D, E, and F, respectively. Source the authors. The major difference between Post-Rift I and the overlying Post-Rift II unit is the great increase in density and decrease of slowness in the former. The average mean of P-sonic calculated from the six selected wells yielded values from 57 to 64 us ft Vp 4750 m s to 5335 m s . The controls on sonic velocity in carbonates presented in Anselmetti and Eberli 1993 depend on a series of parameters such as effective pres sure, depositional environment, diagenetic alterations, and age of the sediment. According to Anselmetti and Eberli 1993 , the carbonate rocks show a broad interval of P-velocities from 2000 m s up to 6000 m s . Velocities of carbonates that were deposited on the shallower water platform have higher velocities than the deeper water samples. This relation can be explained by the higher diagenetic potential of shallow-water carbonates. The explanation for these observed velocity patterns is that the platform is usually rich in coarse-grained carbonates and metastable minerals like beds of shrub-like crystals and diagenetic spherulites growing in the magnesium clay matrix described in the Santos Basin Farias et al., 2019 . Consequently, the velocities of this section in the study area from 4750 m s to 5335 m s corroborate the hypothesis of a shallow-water origin. Moreover, 8-BUZ-26-RJS and 8-BUZ-28DA-RJS wells show an important decrease in resistivity at approximately 5800 m. This behavior can be associated with the pres ence of a high-resistivity material in the upper portion of Unit C. Once 19 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 the upper portion is covered by the base of the salt layer horizon 3 , it is reasonable to suggest the presence of oil at the top of the Barra Velha Formation at the locations of 8-BUZ-26-RJS and 8-BUZ-28DA-RJS wells. According to Tavares da Silva and Gordon 2021 , these carbonates display variable amplitude, and small-scale progradation, are rarely affected by faults, and exhibit common features such as carbonate ramps and mounds deposited preferentially onto preexisting basement highs. These features are consistent with the ones observed in the study area, such as sub-parallel to parallel reflectors with mound geometries at the top of Unit C. The sub-parallel to the parallel pattern can be associated with the aggradational flat-topped carbonate platform described in Buckley et al. 2015 , while the mounds are associated with carbonate build-up facies see Ferreira et al., 2021 . Note that all the analyzed curves exhibit an abrupt change in the pattern when passing from Post-Rift I to Post-Rift II units. Probably, this is a consequence of a considerable change in the lithology. This is related to an unconformity that separates the carbonate sequence from the evaporite one Buckley et al., 2015 . Therefore, the Post-Rift II unit represents the transition between the sag and transitional environment, deposited within a high evaporation rate lake associated with periodic marine transgressions in the Neo-Aptian Gambo a et al., 2008 . The argument of a transition from carbonate to evaporite composition is consistent once there is a considerable decrease in density and a slight increase of the P-sonic values. This is an expected behavior since the mean P-wave velocity of halite, the major component of the saline section in the Bu zios Field, is 4549 m s and its density is 2.03 g cm3 Mohriak et al., 2008 in Justen et al., 2013 . Well-logs from the Post-Rift II unit provided values of density average mean from 2.06 to 2.17 g cm3 and P-sonic average mean next to 68 us ft Vp 4504 m s . Regarding the gamma-ray logs, the Post-Rift II unit has the lowest values, however, it also exhibits some intercalated peaks of high signal. The intercalation of high-value peaks in the upper part of the Post-Rift II unit is ascribed to the stratification of different types of salt, similar to the Evident Strati fication Domain ESD proposed by Maul et al. 2018 . The extremely high GR values 200 GAPI are assigned to the presence of sylvite due to the potassium concentration . Therefore, Unit D is equivalent to the Ariri Formation. At the base of the Drift I unit horizon 4 , density is the highest and tends to decrease upwards, at the same time P-slowness increases. This abrupt change marks the implantation of a marine environment in the Santos Basin, with the deposition of the post-breakup sediment packages from the Late Cretaceous to the Neogene. Roughly, the lower portion of the Drift I unit can be associated with the limestones from the Guaruja Formation. This portion represents the installation of a carbonate plat form during the Albian. The overlying package with lower density and higher slowness is assigned to a coarsening-up sequence, once the coarser lithology tends to be more porous, which explains the decrease in density and increase of slowness VP fluids VP rock . Therefore, the aforementioned upper portion of the Drift I unit is associated with the intercalation of diamictites from the Itajai -Ac u Formation, deposited in the distal platform, slope, and basin environments. This interval repre sents a regression phase where the limit of the platform advanced up to 200 km offshore. The interweaved mound-shaped feature observed at the top of the Drift I unit Fig. 5 was also interpreted as gravitational flow deposits. At this depth 3200 m , Moreira et al. 2007 describe the presence of strongly channelized sandstones resulting from dense turbidity currents Ilhabela Member related to significant excavations on the slope and platform. Drift I and II units have the highest average mean of gamma-ray and the lowest resistivity, with the GR values being even higher for the Drift II unit. The gamma-ray log highlights the intercalation of portions with high and medium GR values. The high gamma-ray and low resistivity can be associated with the presence of the Marambaia Formation shales associated with marls, once the presence of clay, a highly radioactive material, accommodates large amounts of interstitial water Gira o, 2013 . This also explains the low resistivity values, once water is a conductive material, and has very low resistance to electrical current. Moreira et al. 2007 describe the expressive occurrence of dark and radioactive shales throughout the drift mega-sequence. The portions with medium gamma-ray values can be associated with the sandstone bodies intercalated with shales in the Marambaia Fm. Interval. In the context of the Santos Basin evolution, the Drift II unit represents the moment when the carbonate platform reaches its greatest development in the Miocene. From the Lower Miocene onwards, lower-order se quences undergo transgressive development that reaches its peak in the Mid-Miocene Serravallian . This interval marks the highest relative sea-level variation from the Miocene to the present, resulting in the deposition of a substantial volume of sediments Moreira et al., 2007 . The interweaved mound-shaped feature Fig. 6 observed at depths of about 2500 m was associated with gravitational deposits of the Maresias Member. The surface of erosion depicted in Fig. 11 possibly represents canyons infilled with mudstones or sandstones described to occur at slope portions in the Marambaia Fm. shales and diamictites. 5.3. The Bu zios Field in the tectonostratigraphic evolution of the Santos Basin 5.3.1. Comparison with the Tupi Field The Tupi Field, located approximately 50 km southwestward of the Bu zios Field, is another giant petroleum field of the Santos Basin Fig. 1 . A series of comparisons can be placed between the Tupi and Bu zios fields, based on recent works cf. Adriano et al., 2022, Fig. 19 . Compared to the Bu zios Field, the Tupi Field exhibits an important NE-SW thinning of the Pic arras, Itapema, and Barra Velha formations, constrained by the Camboriu Formation high the Tupi High high lighted in Fig. 19-B feature 1 . Analyzing four seismic sections pre sented in Adriano et al. 2022 , the Barra Velha Formation is thicker than we interpreted in the study area. Regarding the structures, a remarkable difference is the rotation of the syn-rift blocks. The blocks of the Tupi Field are tilted at a higher angle, where the internal reflectors are more inclined than in the study area feature 2 in Fig. 19-B . According to Adriano et al. 2022 , there are three main sets of normal faults conditioning the rift phase. NE-SW and N S trends faults control the Lower and Upper Rifts Camboriu , Pic arras, Itapema, and Lower Barra Velha formations , while NW-SE trend conditions the Later Rift Upper Barra Velha Formation . Our work mapped four main trends N S direction west-dipping, NE-SW direction northwest-dipping, NE-SW direction southeast-dipping, and W-E trend dipping to north. In this, only the W-E trend yellow fault, Fig. 8 crosses the Barra Velha Formation Unit C , while all the others are related to units A and B, coherent with the NE-SW and N S trend faults described in Adriano et al. 2022 . 5.3.2. Comparison with the Sapinhoa and Lapa fields The Sapinhoa and Lapa fields, located ca. 120 km southwestward of the Bu zios Field, also have an important role in the pre-salt exploration Fig. 1 . Ribeiro da Silva et al. 2021 present the tectonostratigraphic evolution of the Barra Velha Formation in the area of the Sapinhoa and Lapa fields. According to interpreted sections shown in Ribeiro da Silva et al. 2021, Fig. 20 , there are remarkable differences from what was observed in our study. The first and most prominent one is the geometry of the evaporite cover, the Ariri Formation. In the region of the Sapinhoa and Lapa, the salt section is predominantly thick, forming large salt walls feature 1 in Fig. 20-B . There is a widespread occurrence of this unit across the mapped area, while in the northwest of the Bu zios Fied, the salt section forms windows or scars due to the intense thinning or absence of this package. Besides, the salt in the area of Sapinhoa and Lapa fields is more stratified, and the stratification is observed in vari able depths not restricted to the top of the unit as in the Bu zios Field . In the interpreted NW-SE section from Ribeiro da Silva et al. 2021 , tongues of the non-stratified salt are observed interfingered with 20 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Fig. 19. Tupi Field seismic section presented in Adriano et al. 2022 . A Non-interpreted, and B interpreted seismic profile. Horizon A red , Horizon B orange , Horizon C green , Horizon D blue , and Horizon E pink represent, respectively, the top of Camboriu , Pic arras, Itapema, Lower Barra Velha, and Upper Barra Velha Formations. Light blue represents mounded features. White double-arrowed lines represent the structural compartmentalization of the Tupi Field area. Extracted from Adriano et al. 2022 . The red dotted circles represent the features f1 and f2 mentioned in the text. stratified salt feature 2 in Fig. 20-B . model for this Early Cretaceous phase admits a small asthenospheric uplift Heilbron et al., 2000 . An important criterion that would support the distinction between pure and simple shear would be the presence of detachment surfaces associated with listric faults in the syn-rift stage, suggestive of simple shear. Although such structures were not observed, it is not possible to determine their existence or absence. The study scale up to 9000 m depth and the seismic survey resolution could have masked their detection. Another important factor to consider is that both mechanisms can exist concomitantly and, locally, one or the other may predominate. Therefore, analyzing such a small area within an extensive regional context of the Santos Basin would not be sufficient to determine its opening mechanism, i.e., the Santos Basin has features that suggest both pure and simple-shear mechanisms, with some uplift caused by asthenospheric plumes. However, pure-shear or simple-shear strains likely occur at the same extensional zone. Once the deformation is multiepisodic, each one tends to be heterogeneously distributed rather than coincident. Consequently, the two concepts are not mutually exclusive Armstrong, 1982 . Although the rifting mechanism is not defined, Rabinowitz and LaBrecque 1979 reconstructed the South Atlantic Ocean opening by a clockwise rotation around a pole in the northeast of Brazil. Fig. 21 presents a reconstruction of South Atlantic rifting by the late Aptian 107 M.y. modified from Rabinowitz and LaBrecque 1979 . After this model, Szatmari and Milani 2016 argue the rift was formed as a result of a southward increasing extension in the rear of South America s clockwise rotation. This rotation occurred over an upper mantle kept anomalously hot before rifting by being continuously covered by west ern Gondwana s lithosphere for 350 400 Ma and heated by upwelling 5.3.3. Rifting evolution in the Santos Basin The next step of the research consists of investigating how the tec tonic evolution of the Santos Basin is expressed within the area of the Bu zios Field. To do this, it is crucial to understand how the Santos Basin was generated regarding the rifting mechanisms. A brief review of the main types of rifting proposed by Bosence 1998 is presented in Appendix A. Summarily, there are four main types with specific re lationships with the observed stratigraphic patterns at the basin scale. These mechanisms correspond to pure shear, simple shear, heteroge neous stretching, and mantle plume-related. McKenzie 1978 and Wernicke 1985 also discuss models of rifting and the development of rift basins see Appendix A . Our research did not find sufficient evidence to determine which rifting mechanism was responsible for the opening of the Santos Basin. In the small mapped area, features suggestive of simple or pure shear were observed in the central portion of the basin, such as expressive and laterally continuous syn- and post-rift layers red boxes in Appendix A. Fig. A1-A and B . However, the simple-shear model is predominantly characterized by differing distal and proximal regions. This argument is consistent with what was observed in the comparison of the Bu zios proximal , and Tupi, Sapinhoa , and Lapa distal fields. In the Bu zios Field area, the syn-rift section comprises the siliciclastic and carbonate rocks from Unit B Pic arras Itapema formations and also comprises the basaltic economic basement from Unit A Camboriu Formation . Since the plume-related model Fig. A1-D Bosence, 1998 suggests that the syn-rift section is entirely composed of a volcanic stratigraphy, this model is not preferred here, although the conceptual 21 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Fig. 20. Sapinhoa and Lapa fields seismic section presented in Ribeiro da Silva et al. 2021 . A Non-interpreted, and B interpreted seismic profile. The acronyms DIA and DPA stand for Intra-Alagoas Discordance and Pre-Alagoas Discordance, respectively. The seismic section location map displays the top map of the Barra Velha Formation. Extracted from Ribeiro da Silva et al. 2021 . The red dotted circles represent the features f1 and f2 mentioned in the text. plumes. The clockwise rotation of South America relative to Africa opened the wedge-shaped, southward widening, NNE-SSW to N S-trending South Atlantic rift, while it compressed most of the ENE-WSW to E-W-trending Equatorial margin. The rifting process both widened and deepened the South Atlantic basin towards the south. Rift faulting migrated diachronically toward the future spreading center in South America from west to east . The most widely accepted model regarding the evolution of the South Atlantic Ocean is summarized and explained by Heilbron et al. 2000 after Cainelli and Mohriak 1998, 1999b . This model is based on the lithospheric stretching model proposed by McKenzie 1978 . The first phase is characterized by the beginning of regional lithospheric extension, which eventually led to the separation of the South American and African continents. The next phase is marked by an increase in lithospheric stretching cf. McKenzie, 1978 , coinciding with the development of large faults affecting the continental crust, extrusion of continental flood basalts, and formation of half-grabens. After this early Cretaceous ttectonomagmatic episode, tectonic stresses were directed toward the present-day continental margin. These rifts, which were fil led with Neocomian to Barremian volcanic and siliciclastic rocks, evolved into the present-day passive margin sedimentary basins. Towards the end of the rifting phase, there was a further increase in lithospheric extension marked by large faults that rotated the rift blocks and the sedimentary layers previously deposited. The inception of the oceanic crust probably involved the focus of the lithospheric stretching that was previously distributed in a wider region. This phase is associ ated with volcanism, reactivation of large faults, and erosion of rift blocks by a regional unconformity that levels the topography, separating continental from transitional to marine environments of deposition. Above this unconformity and below the evaporite transitional sequence, some sedimentary basins show a substantial thickness of Aptian silici clastic and carbonate rocks. Following the deposition of salt in the Aptian, sedimentation became predominantly carbonate. An increase in bathymetry led to the deepening of the environment of deposition by the end of the Albian, with the disappearance of the shallow-water carbonates. 22 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Fig. 21. Schematic figure of the reconstructed South Atlantic Rift by the late Aptian 107 M.y. modified from Rabinowitz and LaBrecque 1979 . On the right, the location of Bu zios, Tupi, Sapinhoa , and Lapa fields within the Santos Basin. The relative displacement of Africa and South America is represented by the black arrows. Although Heilbron et al. 2000 do not define the mechanism for the opening of the basins on the Brazilian east margin, it can be concluded that it involves pure shear. This is inferred because it is based on the model of constant and uniform stretching controlled by asthenospheric uplift proposed by McKenzie 1978 . Furthermore, the Brazilian passive margin and its African counterpart are portrayed as a large symmetrical basin in the schematic model presented in Heilbron et al. 2000 . Here, we consider four main postulates of the South Atlantic Ocean opening and related salt tectonics after Heilbron et al., 2000 Szatmari and Milani, 2016 1 the clockwise rotation of South America relative to Africa about a pole located offshore NE Brazil 2 the rifting propa gation from south to north 3 rifting process widened and deepened the South Atlantic basin towards the south and 4 salt mobi lization maturity increases basinward. Once the rifting spreading was N S, the extension was approximately west to east by the time the continents started to separate Fig. 21 . With the clockwise rotation around a pole in NE Brazil, the N S orientation was also rotated about the nowadays N S position. In Fig. 21, the direction of rifting high lighted in red corresponds to the N S orientation by the time the rifting was opening. Fig. 22. Block diagram showing the relationship between salt structures and maturity. The relative position of Bu zios, Tupi, and Sapinhoa Lapa fields within the increasing salt maturity is presented in red. Modified from Jackson and Talbot 1991 in Gillhaus and Horvath 2008 . 23 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Based on these premises and the fact that the Bu zios Field occupies a position closer to the continental margin than Tupi and Sapinhoa Lapa, we suggest that the displacement caused by rifting was smaller in the Bu zios Field Fig. 21 . Therefore, it is reasonable that the syn-rift blocks are more rotated in the area of the Tupi Field, once it experimented with more displacement than the Bu zios area. Once the displacement increased from west to east and the rifting process widened and deepened towards the south, the same argument counts for the intensely mobilized and thicker salt layer in the Sapinhoa , Lapa, and Tupi fields area. These areas are located at greater distances from the continental margin than Bu zios, thus experimenting with more displacement. A schematic diagram Fig. 22, modified from Jackson and Talbot, 1991 in Gillhaus and Horvath, 2008 shows the relative positions of the Bu zios, Tupi, and Sapinhoa Lapa fields in the context of salt maturity. The thick package of the layer in Tupi and Sapinhoa Lapa can be assigned to increased salt mobilization basinward due to the halokinesis. Firstly, it is essential to consider that the driving force for the rise of evaporite rocks through the non-saline cover rock is gravity combined with density differences between the less dense salt deep underground and its more dense cover rock. The autonomous vertical movement of salt is predicated upon the progressive compaction and cementation of the overlying sand, clay, and carbonate layers in the cover rock as a result of basin subsidence until their density is as high or higher than the density of the salt layers. Local uplift of the salt mainly begins in loca tions where there are already significant horizontal lithostatic pressure gradients above or within the salt. Regional lithostatic pressure gradi ents exist in areas such as the transition zones between shelves and continental slopes where the bathymetry leads to a reduction in cover rock thickness towards the center of the basin Eisbacher, 1996 Langer and Schu tte, 2002 Gillhaus and Horvath, 2008 . Therefore, it is ex pected that the proximal portion of the extensional basin experiments a less intense salt mobilization, once the overburden package is thinner and, consequently, the lithostatic pressure is smaller. Due to the basin ward deepening, the opposite behavior occurs in the distal portion. In this case, the Bu zios Field is more proximal to the coastline and exhibits a thinner and less mobilized salt package than occurs in Tupi and Sapinhoa Lapa areas. Despite the continued efforts acting on the basin during continental drift, in the study area, the major factor influencing the deformation of the post-salt package is the salt tectonics. This is concluded from the analysis of the observed structures and deformation patterns. Fig. 9 clearly shows the outline of salt domes and diapirs by post-salt faults. Although halokinesis ceased during the Eo-Oligocene Corre a, 2009 , most of the deformation of the post-salt package was conditioned by salt tectonics, even though there might be a component of deformation associated with the reactivation of syn-rift faults. The major difference between units Drift I and II is the amount of deformation. Once Drift I unit is greatly affected by the halokinesis, Drift II unit is a predominantly regular package, mostly affected by extensional efforts. Horizon 5, which separates Drift I and II units may mark the Late Cretaceous and Tertiary tectonic reactivation, which has resulted in increased salt tec tonics Meisling et al., 2001 Cobbold et al., 2001 . This reactivation could explain the extensional faults in the throughout Drift II package since the halokinesis ceased during Eo-Oligocene in the Santos Basin Corre a, 2009 . Regarding the pre-salt section in the Sapinhoa Lapa fields, the rifting faults intensely affect the Barra Velha Formation. In the Bu zios Field region, only one of the main mapped faults affects this unit, while in the Sapinhoa Field, a great part of the interpreted faults crosses the entire Barra Velha package, reaching out to the base of the salt. The higher angle tilting of the syn-rift blocks observed in the Tupi area is also explained by its position within the tectonic components of the Santos Basin. The Tupi Field is located more distal from the continental margin than the Bu zios area. Regarding the unit s thickness, the thicker Barra Velha Formation package observed in the Tupi Field may be a consequence of the southward widening of the rift, where great space of accommodation was generated by the time de post-rift sequence was deposited. However, it is important to highlight that besides de ac commodation space, many parameters conditionate the carbonate pre cipitation, such as climate, Ph, base level, composition, and solubility of the lake. Besides that, only a few sections were analyzed for this com parison, thus the thickening of the Barra Velha Formation can be local and only a result of spots with a higher deposition rate. By the same logic, it is reasonable to infer that the Sapinhoa Lapa area also presents a thickening of the post-rift sequence, once it is also located eastwards of the Bu zios Field. In the sections shown in Ribeiro da Silva et al. 2021 , the salt package and the Barra Velha Formation are thicker than in the Bu zios Field area. However, it is important to high light that besides de accommodation space, many parameters also conditionate the salt precipitation, such as climate, Ph, base level, composition, and solubility among others of the evaporite lake. In the study area, four main sets of normal faults were mapped throughout the pre-salt section N S direction west-dipping, NE-SW di rection northwest-dipping, NE-SW direction southeast-dipping, and W-E trend dipping to north. The NE-SW faults are probably related to the main fracturing trend of the South Atlantic rift, inherited from crystal line basement Ribeira Belt structures Stanton et al., 2014 , which generates the east-west displacement. The W E fault yellow, Fig. 8 can be associated with a secondary and posterior trend caused by transfer zones. Mohriak and Fainstein 2012 after Asmus and Ferrari 1978 and Meisling et al. 2001 point out the W-E general trend suggests an oblique rift system marked by transfer zones, some of which were reactivated during the formation of oceanic fracture zones. At the eastern limit of continental crust, transfer zones become aligned with ocean ridge transform faults, which trend W-E across the South Atlantic Meisling et al., 2001 . Stanton et al. 2014 describe the presence of structural W E trends predominant at the distal domain of the Santos Basin, with orientation subparallel to the South Atlantic fracture zones. This association is also made by Souza et al. 2007 . This argument supports the hypothesis of the W-E faults being posterior to the rifting fault since it affects the Post-Rift I Barra Velha Fm. reaching out the base of salt. One of the N S fault sets pink, Fig. 8 is deflected to NE. This deflection can be associated with the ENE to NE-trending deflection of about 1000 km long described by Dehler et al. 2016 and Szatmari and Milani 2016 . The aforementioned feature is produced by left-lateral transtensional tectonics in the rift, with a strong strike-slip component along NE-trending faults. The occurrence of volcanic intrusions in the Santos Basin has been locally described. Fornero et al. 2019 describe the occurrence of approximately 400 m of basaltic subaerial flows in the SE deepwater portion of the Santos Basin at about 300 km from the coast. These flows were deposited during the post-rift phase and were covered by the sequence of the Ariri Formation. Moreover, a thick and vertically ori ented intracrustal structure observed in the proximal portion of the Santos Basin is suggested as swarms of dikes with associated plugs, controlled by the NE-SW structures of the rift Ferraz et al., 2018 . However, these volcanic flows were not mapped in the study area. At the research scale , no features suggestive of volcanic intrusions were detected, but this does not necessarily mean they are absent. Zala n et al. 2011 point out the Santos, Campos, and Espi rito Santo basins as a typical example of a magma-poor passive margin. In sharp contrast, the Pelotas Basin situated in the south of the Floriano polis High is the classic example of a volcanic margin, with huge rifts filled mostly by volcanic material. 5.3.4. Sismostratigraphy and tectonic implications In this research, we used 3D seismic attributes, and well-log data to characterize the Bu zios Field in three dimensions. The major findings consist of the identification of six seismic units A, B, C, D, E, and F , which correspond to the tectonic stages Syn-Rift I, Syn-Rift II, Post-Rift I, 24 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Post-Rift II, Drift I, and Drift II, respectively. Based on well data, units B, C, D, E, and F were correlated with the stratigraphy of the Santos Basin. Unit B corresponds to the Pic arras Itapema interval, while unit C is associated with the Barra Velha Formation. Unit D represents the Ariri Fm., and Unit E is related to the Guaruja and Itajai -Ac u formations, as well as the turbidites of the Ilhabela Member. Finally, Unit F is associ ated with the Marambaia Formation shales and the turbidity flows of the Maresias Member. To generate a 3D model, we interpolated five horizons 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 and the main faults. From this model, important features were observed. For instance, the Syn-Rift I unit economic basement is deeper towards N-NW, whereas it is shallower towards S-SE. It occurs due to the presence of a half-grabens system of regional expression. This half-graben system is responsible for conditioning the entire pre-salt geometry and thickness, as the structural highs and lows generate more or less space for sediment accommodation. Although the Post-Rift I unit has a predominantly regular geometry and constant thickness, we noticed a tendency to thicken towards the S-SE and a slight downward flexure towards the NE in the southeast of the Bu zios Field in the 3D model. An important observation from the 3D model is the complex morphology of the Post-Rift II unit. The unit s thickness varies from zero in the NW part of the study area to 3300 m below the steep and thick domes and diapirs. Moving towards the SE, the unit s topography be comes more irregular, where thick anticlinal and synclinal features alternate. Towards the S-SE, the salt layer is thicker, and the domes are less steep. The thickness of the Drift I unit is highly influenced by the salt morphology. In areas where the salt package is thin in the north , the Drift I unit is thicker, reaching up to 3600 m. The top surface of this unit horizon 5 is primarily flat but discontinuous due to the presence of dipslip faults. Lastly, the Drift II unit is characterized by a relatively con stant thickness of about 500 m, with minor variations in proximity to fault zones. The 3D modeling of these units allowed the observation of many features that researchers often disregarded in studies conducted in the Santos Basin. Since most of these studies focus on characterizing the presalt reservoirs, many morphological and structural aspects are not investigated within the rest of the basin. Comparing our study area with the Tupi and Sapinhoa Lapa fields, three important differences were found the Post-Rift I layer Barra Velha Fm. and the Post-Rift II package Ariri Fm. are thicker and more mobilized than in the Bu zios Field. In the Tupi Field, the pre-salt blocks are more rotated, and the internal reflectors have a higher inclination than in the study area. The evaporite package seems less mobilized and thinner in the Bu zios Field area than in Sapinhoa Lapa and Tupi fields. Four postulates were crucial to understanding the rifting mechanism responsible for the formation of the South Atlantic Ocean and the eastern Brazilian basins 1 the clockwise rotation of South America relative to Africa about a pole located offshore NE Brazil 2 the prop agation of rifting from south to north 3 the rifting process widened and deepened the South Atlantic basin towards the south, and 4 salt mobilization maturity increases basinward. Based on these premises, we concluded that the increased mobilization of salt, higher post-rift package thickness, and increased syn-rift block rotation are associated with the relative distance from the continental margin and, conse quently, with the amount of displacement generated by the South Atlantic Rift. Since this work modeled a unit that spatially corresponds to the Barra Velha Formation, this opens up opportunities for future studies with greater detail focused on reservoir characterization. With a detailed interpretation grid, it is possible to model the carbonate mounds located right below the salt layer, which are known to be important traps for oil accumulation. Also, future works can be implemented in investigating the African counterpart of the Santos Basin to search for clues that determine which rifting mechanism was responsible for the opening of the basin. 6. Conclusions In this study, we have characterized the Bu zios Field in three di mensions using 3D seismic data, seismic attributes, and well-log data. The combined use of these tools enabled the understanding of important parameters within the tectonostratigraphic evolution of the Santos Basin. Specifically, we examined how the relative position of the study area concerning the continental margin influences the amount of displacement observed in the region and how this positioning affects the mobilization and thickness of the salt package. While most recent studies have focused on the reservoir character ization of the Bu zios Field, our research aimed to understand how this area fits into the broader context of the evolution of the Santos Basin. Through the 3D model, we connected the observed features with the tectonostratigraphic evolution of the Bu zios Field area, attempting to investigate how the opening of the rift and halokinesis impacted the current geometric and stratigraphic arrangement. In an attempt to reconstruct the tectonic evolution of the Santos Basin in a regional approach, the mapped units were compared to their analogs within other oil fields situated in different positions within the basin. Comparing the study area with the Tupi and Sapinhoa Lapa fields, three significant features were crucial to comprehend the rifting evolution within the Santos Basin. These features consist of thinner PostRift I Barra Velha Fm. and Post-Rift II Ariri Fm. layers and less mobilization in the Bu zios Field. Additionally, the pre-salt blocks display minor rotation, and the internal reflectors demonstrate a smoother inclination in the study area when contrasted with these other fields. Considering the rift mechanisms and the most widely accepted models for the opening of the South Atlantic Rift, this research concludes that the reduced salt mobilization, post-rift package thickness, and rotation of the syn-rift blocks in the Bu zios Field are associated with the relative distance from the continental margin and, thus, the magnitude of displacement caused by the South Atlantic Rift. In this context, the Bu zios Field is positioned in closer proximity to the continental margin than the Tupi and Sapinhoa Lapa fields, suggesting a lower level of displacement. Declaration of generative AI in scientific writing During the preparation of this work, the authors used GPT chat in order to improve language and vocabulary. After using this tool service, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the publication. CRediT authorship contribution statement Fernanda Moura Costa Writing original draft, Visualization, Validation, Investigation, Conceptualization. Aline Tavares Melo Writing review editing, Validation, Supervision, Methodology, Investigation, Data curation, Conceptualization. Tiago Ama ncio Novo Writing review editing, Validation, Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Funding acquisition. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare the following financial interests personal re lationships which may be considered as potential competing interests Fernanda Moura Costa reports financial support was provided by Pet robras. Fernanda Moura Costa reports a relationship with Petrobras that includes funding grants. Data availability The authors do not have permission to share data. 25 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Acknowledgements especially thank ANP for providing the data used in this study, and the DUG company for providing the DUG Insight academic license used for seismic visualization, interpretation, and analysis. The authors also thank the SI SMICA research group, especially Wagner Meira Teixeira, Je ssica Lia Santos da Costa, Tobias Fonte-Boa, Caique Pinheiro Car valho, and Mariana Leite for all the support and discussions. Finally, the author thank Thiago Tori bio, Felipe Farias, and Andrea Damasceno from Petrobras for their support and constructive suggestions and ideas. This article is part of the results of master research of Fernanda Moura Costa and is funded by Petrobras master s grant through the P D project entitled Intelige ncia artificial aplicada a explorac a o de petro leo na camada pre -sal n 28184 . This work was undertaken at the Federal University of Minas Gerais, Post-Graduation Program, Institute of Geo sciences, Department of Geology CPMTC-IGC-UFMG . The authors APPENDIX A. Models of Rifting Mechanisms According to Bosence 1998 , the four main types of rifting correspond to pure shear Fig. A1-A , simple shear Fig. A1-B , heterogeneous stretching Fig. A1-C , and mantle plume-related Fig. A1-D . Fig. A1. Models of rifting and predicted nature of stratigraphic fills in rift basins resulting from pure shear A , simple shear B , heterogeneous stretching C , and mantle plume D . Extracted from Bosence 1998 . The red dotted polygons suggest the infill configuration observed in the study area. The model of development and evolution of rift basins of McKenzie 1978 defines three major stages. The first consists of a rapid stretching of continental lithosphere, which produces thinning and passive upwelling of hot asthenosphere, with block faulting and subsidence. Then the litho sphere thickens and subsidence turns slower. The author considers the stretching continuous and uniform during the rifting. Wernicke 1985 proposes an alternative model of stretching the lithosphere by simple shear, in which the rifting starts from a shallowly inclined fault or shear zone at depth . The base of this theory is the occurrence of extensional allochthons zones with large displacement, which exhibit east-dipping, east-directed, low-angle normal faults, and wide shear zones gently. This model proposes that the crust s large-scale, uniform-sense, and normal simple shear is a reflex of what occurs with the entire lithosphere. Also, it predicts major lithospheric thinning without crustal thinning in plateau areas in the direction of crustal shear. The main trace of the simple-shear mechanism is the absence of evidence of extension in the lower lithosphere, but the presence in the upper and middle crust. The upper and middle-crustal extension is registered by regional low-angle detachments beneath normal fault systems and a subjacent zone of ductile deformation. The main clue of a simple-shear mechanism is pointed out as the detachment surfaces associated with the brittle-ductile transition. Appendix B. Supplementary data Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https doi.org 10.1016 j.jsames.2023.104541. 26 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 References Farias, F., Szatmari, P., Bahniuk, A., Franc a, A.B., 2019. Evaporitic carbonates in the presalt of Santos Basin genesis and tectonic implications. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 105, 251 272. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2019.04.020, 2019. Ferraz, A.E.P.P.D., Ferrari, A.L., Aristiza bal, C., Guimara es, P.B.M., 2018. Estrutura magne tica crustal sob os campos petroli feros do pre -sal ee sua relac a o com o magmatismo Bacia De Santos. 49 Congresso Brasileiro de Geologia, 20 a 24 de agosto de 2018 Rio de Janeiro. https doi.org 10.13140 RG.2.2.26223.69286. Ferreira, D.J.A., 2022. Advanced Techniques for 3D Reservoir Characterization Models for the Buios Field. Santos Basin. Dissertac a o de Doutorado. Universidade Federal Fluminense, Nitero i, p. 117. Ferreira, D.J.A., Dias, R.M., Lupinacci, W.M., 2021. Seismic pattern classification integrated with permeability-porosity evaluation for reservoir characterization of salt carbonates in the Buzios Field, Brazil. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. https doi.org 10.1016 j.petrol.2021.108441, 201-108441. Fornero, S.A., Marins, G.M., Lobo, J.T., Freire, A.F.M., de Lima, E.F., 2019. Characterization of subaerial volcanic facies using acoustic image logs lithofacies and log-facies of a lava-flow deposit in the Brazilian pre-salt, deepwater of Santos Basin. Mar. Petrol. Geol. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2018.09.029. Gambo a, L., Machado, M., Silveira, De Freitas, J., Da Silva, S., 2008. Evaporitos estratificados no Atlantico Sul interpretac a o si smica e controle tectonoestratigra fico na Bacia de Santos. In Mohriak, W., et al. Eds. , Sal Geologia e Tectonica, Exemplos nas Basicas Brasileiras Sa o Paulo, Brasil. Beca Edic o es Ltd., pp. 340 359 Gillhaus, A., Horvath, P.L., 2008. Compilation of geological and geotechnical data of worldwide domal salt deposits and domal salt cavern fields. In Research Project Report N . 2007-1-SMRI. KBB Underground Technologies GmbH, Hannover. Gira o, G., 2013. Perfilagem Geofi sica Em Poc o Aberto Fundamentos Ba sicos Com E nfase Em Petro leo. Sociedade Brasileira de Geofi sica SBGf Rio de Janeiro, p. 222. Guerra, M.C.M., Underhill, J.R., 2012. Role of halokinesis in controlling structural styles and sediment dispersal in the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. Geol. Soc. Spec. Publ. 363 1 , 175 206. https doi.org 10.1144 SP363.9. Heilbron, M., Mohriak, W., Valeriano, C.M., Milani, E., Almeida, J.C.A., Tupinamba, M., 2000. From collision to extension the roots of the southeastern continental margin of Brazil. In Mohriak, W.U., Talwani, M. Eds. , Atlantic Rifts and Continental Margins, vol. 115. American Geophysical Union Geophysical Monograph, pp. 1 32. https doi.org 10.1029 GM115p0001. Jackson, M.P.A., Talbot, C.J., 1991. A glossary of salt tectonics. In Jackson, M.P.A., Talbot, C.J. Eds. , Compilation of Geological and Geotechnical Data of Worldwide Domal Salt Deposits and Domal Salt Cavern Fields. Solution Mining Research Institute Report, Clarks Summit, PA, USA, p. 100, 44pp. In Gillhaus, A., Horvath, P. L. 2008 . Kuchle, J., 2010. Ana lise tectono-estratigra fica de bacias rifte. Dissertac a o de Doutorado. Programa de Po s-Graduac a o em Geocie ncias. Instituto de Geocie ncias, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, p. 198. Langer, A., Schu tte, H., 2002. Geologie norddeutscher salinare. In Gillhaus, A., Horvath, P.L. Eds. , 2008 . Compilation of Geological and Geotechnical Data of Worldwide Domal Salt Deposits and Domal Salt Cavern Fields. Research Project Report N . 2007-1-SMRI. KBB Underground Technologies GmbH, Hannover, pp. 63 69. Vero ffentl. Akad. Geowiss. Hannover, 20. Macedo, P.H.C., Barretto, D.R., Neves, I.A., Abrantes Junior, F.R., Lupinacci, W.M., 2021. Seismic Interpretation of Presalt Carbonate Reservoirs of the Bu zios Field. Santos Basin. 17th International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society held in Rio de Janeiro. Brazil, 16-19August 2021. Marfurt, K.J., Kirlin, R.L., Farmer, S.L., Bahorich, M.S., 1998. 3-D seismic attributes using a semblance-based coherency algorithm. Geophysics 63 4 . https doi.org 10.1190 1.1444415, 1150-116. Maul, A., Fonseca, J., Teixeira, L., Barros, P., Boechat, J., Nunes, J.P., Yamamoto, T., Gonza lez, M., Gonza lez, G., 2018. Modelling intra-salt layers when building velocity models for depth migration Examples of the Santos Basins, Brazilian offshore. In 88th Annual Meeting. Anaheim CA, USA. SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2018. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, pp. 3764 3767. https doi. org 10.1190 segam2018-2996209.1. Mckenzie, D., 1978. Some remarks on the development of sedimentary basins. Earth Planet Sci. Lett. 40, 25 32. https doi.org 10.1016 0012-821X 78 90071-7. Meisling, K.E., Cobbold, P.R., Mount, V.S., 2001. Segmentation of an obliquely rifted margin, Campos and Santos basins, southeastern Brazil. AAPG Bull. 85 11 , 1903 1924. https doi.org 10.1306 8626D0A9-173B-11D7-8645000102C1865D. Mesquita, F.C., Santos, M.A.C., Maul, A.R., Bordignon, A.L., 2021. New method of seismofacies identification using machine learning over seismic attributes applied to salt stratifications. Braz. J. Genet. 39 1 https doi.org 10.22564 rbgf.v38i4.2080. Milani, E.J., Branda o, J.A.S.L., Zala n, P.V., Gamboa, L.A.P., 2000. Petro leo Na Margem Continental Brasileira geologia, Explorac a o, Resultados e Perspectivas. Braz. J. Genet. 18 3 https doi.org 10.1590 S0102-261X2000000300012. Mio, E. de, Chang, H.K., Corre a, F.S., 2005. Integrac a o de me todos geofi sicos na modelagem crustal da Bacia de Santos. Rev. Bras. Geofi s. 23 3 , 275 284. https doi.org 10.1590 S0102-261X2005000300006. Mitchell, D.J.W., Allen, R.B., Salama, W., Abouzakm, A., 1992. Tectonostratigraphic framework and hydrocarbon potential of the Red Sea. J. Petrol. Geol. 15 2 , 187 210. https doi.org 10.1111 j.1747-5457.1992.tb00962.x. Mohriak, W.U., Fainstein, R., 2012. Phanerozoic regional Geology of the eastern continental margin of Brazil. In Roberts, D.G., Bally, A.W. Eds. , Regional Geology and Tectonics Phanerozoic Passive Margins, Cratonic Basins and Global Tectonic Maps. Elsevier, The Netherlands, 1 Amsterdam, The Netherlands, pp. 222 283. https doi.org 10.1016 B978-0-444-56357-6.00006-8. Mohriak, W.U., Szatmari, P., Anjos, S., 2008. Sal Geologia e Tecto nica. Exemplos nas Bacias Brasileiras Beca Edic o es Ltda. In Justen, J.R.C., Vargas Jr, E.A., Alves, I., Abdullah, A.B., Murti, B.S., Sismanto, 2005. Karakterisasi reservoar menggunakan analisis atribut seismik di lapangan abas cekungan kutai kalimantan timur. Vol.IX Edition Jurnal Fisika Indonesia 28, 127 140. In . Pamungkas, T.D., Nandi, Ridwana, R. 2021 . Conceptual interpretation seismic 3d using rms amplitude and dipazimuth attribute analysis for identification structure and facies model in physical geographic. International Geography Seminar 2019. IOP Conf. Series Earth and Environmental Science 683 2021 012055. doi 10.1088 1755-1315 683 1 012055. Adriano, M.S., Figueiredo, J.P., Coelho, P.H.G.R., Borghi, L., 2022. Tectonic and stratigraphic evolution of the Santos Basin rift phase new insights from seismic interpretation on Tupi oil field area. J. S. Am. Earth Sci. 116 2022 , 103842 https doi.org 10.1016 j.jsames.2022.103842. Anselmetti, F.S., Eberli, G.P., 1993. Controls on sonic velocity in carbonates. Pure Appl. Geophys. 141 2 3 4 https doi.org 10.1007 BF00998333. Arai, M., Viviers, M.C., 2013. Dinoflagellate cyst superdominance assemblages from the Upper Cretaceous of the Santos Basin, offshore SE Brazil, and their palaeoecological significance. In Lewis, J.M., Marret, F., Bradley, L. Eds. , 2013 . Biological and Geological Perspectives of Dinoflagellates. The Micropalaeontological Society, Special Publications. Geological Society, London, pp. 285 292. https doi.org 10.1144 TMS5.27. Armstrong, R.L., 1982. Cordilleran metamorphic core complexes from Arizona to southern Canada. Annu. Rev. Earth Planet Sci. 10, 129 154. https doi.org 10.1146 annurev.ea.10.050182.001021. Asmus, H.E., Ferrari, A.L., 1978. Hipo tese sobre a causa do tectonismo cenozo ico na regia o sudeste do Brasil. Se rie Projeto Remac 4, 75 88. Assine, M.L., Corre a, F.S., Chang, H.K., 2008. Migrac a o de depocentros na Bacia de Santos importa ncia na explorac a o de hidrocarbonetos. Rev. Bras. Geociencias 38 2 - Suppl. o , 111 127. https doi.org 10.25249 0375-7536.2008382S111127. Bosence, D.W.J., 1998. In Purser, B.H., Bosencc, D.W.J. Eds. , Stratigraphic and Sedimentological Models of Rift Basins . Sedimentation and Tectonics of Rift Basins Red Sea-Gulf of Aden. Published in 1998 by Chapman Hall, London. https doi. org 10.1007 978-94-011-4930-3 2. Brown, A., 2011. Interpretation of three-dimensional seismic data. In APG Memoir 42 SEG Investigations in Geophysics, seventh ed. https doi.org 10.1190 1.9781560802884.fm 9. Buckley, J.D., Bosence, D.W., Elders, C.F., 2015. Tectonic Setting and Stratigraphic Architecture of an Early Cretaceous Lacustrine Carbonate Platform, 418. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, Sugar Loaf High, Santos Basin, Brazil, pp. 1 17. https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.13, 2015. Cainelli, C., Mohriak, W.U., 1998. Geology of atlantic eastern Brazilian basins, 1998. In AAPG, International Conference Exhibition Short Course Brazilian Geology Part II, p. 67. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Cainelli, C.C., Mohriak, W.U., 1999b. Some remarks on the evolution of sedimentary basins along the Eastern Brazilian continental margin. Episodes 22, 206 216. https doi.org 10.18814 epiiugs 1999 v22i3 008. Castro, T.M., Lupinacci, W.M., 2019. Evaluation of Fine Grains in Pre-salt Reservoirs. Sixteenth International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. August 2019. Castro, T.M., 2019. Avaliac a o dos reservato rios carbona ticos do pre -sal no Campo de Bu zios, Bacia de Santos. In Dissertac a o de Mestrado em Geologia e Geofi sica. Universidade Federal Fluminense, Nitero i, p. 183. Chang, H.K., Assine, M.L., Corre a, F.S., Tinen, J.S., Vidal, A.C., Koike, L., 2008. Sistemas petroli feros e modelos de acumulac a o de hidrocarbonetos na Bacia de Santos. Rev. Bras. Geociencias 38 2 - Suppl. o , 29 46. https doi.org 10.25249 03757536.2008382S2946. Chopra, S., Marfurt, K.J., 2007. Seismic Attributes for Prospect Identification and Reservoir Characterization, 1. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, Tulsa. https doi.org 10.1190 1.9781560801900.fm. 2. Cobbold, P.R., Meisling, K.E.M., Mount, V.S., 2001. Reactivation of an obliquely-rifted margin, Campos and Santos basins, southeastern Brazil. AAPG Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull. 85 11 , 1925 1944. https doi.org 10.1306 8626D0A9-173B-11D78645000102C1865D. Corre a, F.S., 2009. Evoluc a o halocine tica da regia o centro-norte da Bacia de Santos, Brasil. In Dissertac a o de Doutorado em Geocie ncias e Meio Ambiente. Instituto de Geocie ncias e Cie ncias Exatas, Universidade Estadual Paulista, p. 308. Dehler, N.M., Magnavita, L.P., Gomes, L.C., Rigoti, C.A., Bach de Oliveira, J.A., Sant Anna, M.V., 2016. The Helmut geophysical anomaly a regional left lateral transtensional shear zone system connecting Santos and Campos basins, southeastern Brazil. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 72, 412 422. https doi.org 10.1016 j. marpetgeo.2016.01.012. Dias, A.L.L., Lima, M.V.A.G., Frigo, E., 2019. Ana lise e interpretac a o de atributos si smicos instanta neos uma contribuic a o ao estudo do arcabouc o tecto nico-estrutural da Bacia de Pelotas. In 16th International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society. https doi.org 10.22564 16cisbgf2019.044. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Dias, R.M., Castro, T.M., Lupinacci, W.M., Santos, M.A.C., 2019. Understanding the Relationship between Acoustic Impedance and Porosity in the Presalt of the Buzios Field Santos Basin. First EAGE Workshop on Pre-Salt Reservoir, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. https doi.org 10.3997 2214-4609.201982009. December 2019. DUG Insight version 4.7 , 2020. Windows Linux Mac. Perth. DUG Technology Ltd, Western Australia. Eisbacher, G.H., 1996. Einfu hrung in die Tektonik 374 S., Stuttgart. In Gillhaus, A., Horvath, P.L. Eds. , Compilation of Geological and Geotechnical Data of Worldwide Domal Salt Deposits and Domal Salt Cavern Fields. Research Project Report N . 2007-1-SMRI. KBB Underground Technologies GmbH, Hannover, 2008. 27 F. Moura Costa et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 131 2023 104541 Silva, H.P.N., 2012. Caracterizac a o e Delimitac a o de Reservato rios Usando Atributos Si smicos. Dissertac a o de Mestrado. Universidade de Aveiro, Portugal, p. 114. Souza, B.P.E., 2021. Estudo de alguns atributos si smicos para a caracterizac a o estrutural Aplicac a o na bacia de Taranaki. Nova Zela ndia. Trabalho de Conclusa o de Curso. Universidade Federal Fluminense. Nitero i. 59pp. Souza, I.A., Ebert, H.D., Castro, J.C., Silva, G.H.T., 2007. A influe ncia das falhas de transfere ncia na porc a o norte da Bacia de Santos na formac a o de armadilhas capazes de conter hidrocarbonetos. 4 PDPETRO, Campinas, SP, 1.1.0063-1 2. Souza, L.S., Sgarbi, G.N.C., 2016. Bacia de Santos de promissora a principal bacia produtora de hidrocarbonetos do Brasil. XLVIII Congresso Brasileiro de Geologia. Porto Alegre, Brasil. Souza, L.S., Sgarbi, G.N.C., 2019. Bacia de Santos no Brasil geologia, explorac a o e produc a o de petro leo e ga s natural. Bol. Geol. 41 1 , 175 195. https doi.org 10.18273 revbol.v41nl-2019009. Stanton, N., Ponte-Neto, C., Bijani, R., Masini, E., Fontes, S., Flexor, J.M., 2014. A geophysical view of the Southeastern Brazilian margin at Santos Basin insights into rifting evolution. J. S. Am. Earth Sci. 55, 141 154. https doi.org 10.1016 j. jsames.2014.07.003. Szatmari, P., Milani, E.J., 2016. Tectonic control of the oil-rich large igneous-carbonatesalt province of the. South Atlantic rift. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 77, 567 596. https doi. org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2016.06.004. Taner, M.T., 2001. Seismic attributes. Recorder, Canadian Society of Exploration Geophysicists 26 7 , 48 56. Taner, M.T., Koehler, F., Sherie , R.E., 1979. Complex seismic trace analysis. Geophysics 44, 1041 1063. https doi.org 10.1190 1.1440994. Tavares dos Santos, P., Gordon, A.C., 2021. Bu zios Field geological setting of the largest pre-salt field, Santos Basin, Brazil. In Mello, Marcio R., Yilmaz, Pinar O., Katz, Barry J. Eds. , The Supergiant Lower Cretaceous Pre-salt Petroleum Systems of the Santos Basin, Brazil AAPG Memoir 124, pp. 375 394. https doi.org 10.1306 13722365MSB.14.1853. Wernicke, B., 1985. Uniform sense normal simple shear of the continental lithosphere. Can. J. Earth Sci. 22 1 , 108 125. https doi.org 10.1139 e85-009. Zala n, P.V., Severino, M.D.C.G., Rigoti, C.A., Magnavita, L.P., Oliveira, J.A.B., Vianna, A. R., 2011. An entirely new 3D-view of the crustal and mantle structure of a South Atlantic passive margin Santos, Campos and Espi rito Santo basins, Brazil. In AAPG Annual Conference and Exhibition, 2011. Houston. Actas, vol. 10. Houston AAPG, p. 13. Souza, A.L.S. Eds. , 2013 . Ana lise das propriedades ela sticas de rochas e minerais evapori ticos. 13th International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society held in Rio de Janeiro. doi 10.1190 sbgf2013-237. Moreira, J.L.P., Madeira, C.V., Gil, J.A., Machado, M.A.P., 2007. Bacia de Santos. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 15 2 , 531 549. Neves, I.A., Lupinacci, W.M., Ferreira, D.F.A., Zambrini, J.P.R., Oliveira, L.O.A., OlhoAzul, M., Ferrari, A.L., Gamboa, L.A.P., 2019. Presalt reservoirs of the Santos Basin cyclicity, electrofacies and tectonic-sedimentary evolution. Interpretation 7 4 , 1 37. https doi.org 10.1190 int-2018-0237.1. Obafemi, S., Oyedele, K.F., Omeru, T., Bankole, S.I., 2020. Characterization of deep water turbidite channels and submarine fan lobes using artificial intelligence Case study of Frem Field deep offshore Niger Delta. J. Afr. Earth Sci. https doi.org 10.1016 j.jafrearsci.2020.103852. Oliveros, R.B., Radovich, B.J., 1999. Image-processing Display Techniques Applied to Seismic Instantaneous Attributes over the Gorgon Gas Field. SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts, North West Shelf, Australia, pp. 2064 2067. https doi.org 10.1190 1.1885862. Papaterra, G.E.Z., 2010. Pre-salt geological concepts on a new exploratory frontier in Brazil. In Dissertac a o de Mestrado em Geologia. Programa de Po s-Graduac a o em Geologia, Instituto de Geocie ncias, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, p. 81. Pereira, M.J., Macedo, J.M., 1990. A Bacia de Santos perspectivas de uma nova provi ncia petroli fera na plataforma continental sudeste brasileira. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 4 1 , 3 11. Prosser, S., 1993. Rift-related linked depositional systems and their seismic expression. Geological Society, London, Special Publications 71, p35 p66. https doi.org 10.1144 GSL.SP.1993.071.01.03, 1993. Rabinowitz, P.D., Labrecque, J., 1979. The mesozoic South Atlantic Ocean and the evolution of its continental margins. J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 84 B11 , 5973 6002. https doi.org 10.1029 JB084iB11p05973. Ribeiro da Silva, S.F.C., Figueiredo, J.J.P., Coelho, P.H., Borghi, L., 2021. Evoluc a o tectonoestratigra fica da Formac a o Barra Velha na a rea dos campos de Lapa e Sapinhoa , Bacia de Santos brasil. Sa o Paulo, UNESP, Geocie ncias 40 1 , 55 69. https doi.org 10.5016 geociencias.v40i1.14679. Schmidt, R.O.R., 2013. Ana lise das respostas de atributos si smicos dos carbonatos Barremiano, Albiano e Neo geno no Campo de Bonito, Bacia de Campos- RJ. Trabalho de Conclusa o de Curso. Universidade Estadual Paulista, p. 81. 28

[END_OF_PAPER]

Presalt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola Arthur Saller, Shawn Rushton, Lino Buambua, Kerry Inman, Ross McNeil, and J. A. D. Tony Dickson ABSTRACT The Lower Cretaceous presalt section in the Kwanza Basin contains an excellent petroleum system that includes synrift strata Barremian overlain by a sag interval Aptian and capped by the Loeme Salt. The upper synrift is generally limestone with widespread mollusk packstones and grainstones coquinas deposited in a fresh-to moderately saline alkaline lake. The sag interval is characterized by carbonate platforms and silica-rich isolated buildups formed in highly evaporated, highly alkaline lakes. Shrubby dendritic , microbially influenced boundstones and intraclast spherulite grainstones accumulated in shallow water on platform tops. Microbial cherts were deposited as organic buildups on large, isolated structural highs basinward west of platforms, and they apparently formed at low temperatures in very alkaline lake water. Shrubby boundstones and microbial cherts have vuggy pores that are primary and result in high permeability. Wackestones and packstones with calcitic grains mainly spherulites in dolomite or argillaceous dolomite were deposited in slightly deeper, low-energy sag environments. In addition, clays especially stevensite precipitated out of the silica-rich, highly alkaline lake waters. During sag deposition, calcite precipitated on the shallow lake floor with morphologies that ranged from spherulites to shrubs and included a continuum of intermediate forms. Spherulites probably precipitated just below the sediment water interface. Spherulites and shrubby calcites are commonly recrystallized. Spherulites floating in stevensite probably formed in deeper lacustrine environments. Organic-rich mudstones were deposited in even deeper lacustrine environments in synrift and sag intervals, and they are likely the source of most hydrocarbons in this system. These interpretations are supported by seismic, core, petrographic, and stable isotope data. Copyright 2016. The American Association of Petroleum Geologists. All rights reserved. Manuscript received November 2, 2015 provisional acceptance January 12, 2016 revised manuscript received January 24, 2016 final acceptance February 11, 2016. DOI 10.1306 02111615216 AAPG Bulletin, v. 100, no. 7 July 2016 , pp. 1135 1164 1135 AUTHORS Arthur Saller Cobalt International Energy, 920 Memorial City Way, Suite 100, Houston, Texas 77024 arthur.saller cobaltintl.com Art Saller is a carbonate sedimentologist and stratigrapher for Cobalt International Energy in Houston. He attended the University of Kansas B.S., 1977 , Stanford University M.S., 1980 , and Louisiana State University Ph.D., 1984 . Art has had the pleasure of working for Cities Service Oil and Gas in Tulsa 1984 1986 Unocal in Brea, California and Houston 1986 2005 and Chevron in Houston 2005 2012 . Shawn Rushton Cobalt International Energy, 920 Memorial City Way, Suite 100, Houston, Texas 77024 shawn.rushton cobaltintl.com Shawn Rushton is an exploration geophysicist with over 16 years of experience in the industry. He has worked for small- and medium-sized oil and gas companies on projects all over the world. He received a B.Sc. degree 1998 in geology geophysics and an M.Sc. degree 2000 in geophysics from the University of Calgary. He currently works for Cobalt International Energy Inc. in exploration. Lino Buambua Sonangol EP, Edificio Sede, Rua Rainha Ginga 29-36, Luanda, Angola lino.buambua sonangol.co.ao Lino Buambua is an exploration geologist with over 15 years of experience in the petroleum industry currently working for Sonangol inWest Africa, Europe, and the United States. He received a B.Sc. degree 1993 in geology from Rio de JaneiroFederal Universityand an M.Sc. in geoscience 1996 from the University of Campinas Unicamp Brazil . Kerry Inman Cobalt International Energy, 920 Memorial City Way, Suite 100, Houston, Texas 77024 Kerry.Inman cobaltintl.com Kerry Inman is an exploration geologist for Cobalt International Energy in Houston, where she has worked for the past 10 years. Prior to joining Cobalt, she worked as an independent consultant and for Sohio BP, primarily focused on regional analysis and prospect generation. She received a B.A. degree in geology from Colgate University and an M.S. from the University of Arizona. Ross McNeil Cobalt International Energy, 920 Memorial City Way, Suite 100, Houston, Texas 77024 Ross.McNeil cobaltintl.com Ross McNeil is an exploration geophysicist with over 20 years of experience in domestic and international exploration. He received a B.S. degree in geophysics from the University of California at Santa Barbara and an M.S. degree in geophysics from the University of Utah. He currently works for Cobalt International Energy. J. A. D. Tony Dickson Department of Earth Science, Downing Street, Cambridge University, Cambridge CB2 3EQ, United Kingdom jadd1 esc.cam.ac.uk Tony Dickson has B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in geology London University, England has taught at Cardiff, Nottingham, and Cambridge Universities has given many industry courses and has consulted on carbonate diagenesis Central Basin Platform, Texas Tarim Basin, China Tengiz, Kazakhstan Wafra, Neutral Zone and Kwanza Basin, Angola . He is a recipient of the Wollaston Fund Geological Society, London and the Pettijohn Medal SEPM . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Sonangol EP, BP, Sonangol P P, and Cobalt International Energy for permission to publish this manuscript. We received insight and help from many colleagues at Cobalt, including Chris Olson, Tim Nicholson, John Shinol, Shawn Mulcahy, Keith Jantz, Ryan Murphy, Truitt Smith, Jim Farnsworth, James Painter, April Parsons, Ed Cazier, Connie Bargas, Chris Davin, Paul Langlois, Steve Mondziel, Lynne Hackedorn, Jennifer Lewis, Richard Redhead, Chris Calnan, Mike Cleveland, Owen BeMent, Mugabe Goncalves, Olimpia Custodio, Yolanda Silva, Jim Geary, Renee Porter, Kim Mettes, Tony Gonnell, and Anto nio Vieira. Several other people provided important support for this study, including Kate Giles, Greg Wahlman, Reed Glasmann, Nicola Adams, Domingos Cunha, Francisca B. C. Lemos V. D. da Silva, Alipio Lopes, Hercinda 1136 Presalt Deposition Kwanza Basin INTRODUCTION Both sides of the South Atlantic contain major petroleum provinces with oil in reservoirs extending from Lower Cretaceous carbonates to Neogene sandstones. The basin history included widespread salt deposition in the upper Aptian. Strata deposited before salt deposition are referred to as presalt. Substantial amounts of oil have been produced from presalt strata for several decades in Brazil and West Africa Guardado et al., 1990 McHargue, 1990 Dale et al., 1992 . Recent large discoveries in Brazil Carminatti et al., 2008 have made the presalt play very important globally. The presalt play in Angola was rejuvenated by recent discoveries in the Kwanza Basin Greenhalgh et al., 2012 Cazier et al., 2014 . The purpose of this paper is to present data and interpretations on presalt stratigraphy and depositional facies in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola, which appear similar to the presalt systems in Brazil. For confidentiality reasons, we avoid giving well names and depths in this paper. GENERAL SETTING South America started to separate from Africa in the Early Cretaceous, with rifting and sea floor spreading beginning in the south and migrating to the north Figure 1 Fairhead and Wilson, 2005 Davison, 2007 . Rifting created a series of horsts, grabens, and half grabens from Gabon to south Angola Torsvik et al., 2009 . As rifting spread from south to north, basin development progressed from many smaller grabens and lakes synrift to regional subsidence creating widespread lacustrine sag deposits Carminatti et al., 2008 Quirk et al., 2013 . In offshore Angola and Brazil, the entire presalt section of siliciclastic and carbonate strata is interpreted as deposition in a series of lakes and associated terrestrial environments ranging in age from Hauterivian to lower upper Aptian 133 117 Ma Figure 2 Quirk et al., 2013 . Early rift deposition was dominated by siliciclastics siliceous mudstones, sandstones, conglomerates . However, during the later stages of rifting Barremian , areas that include current offshore Angola and southern Brazil had substantial lacustrine carbonate deposition Guardado et al., 1990 Dale et al., 1992 , whereas sandstones were deposited in the northern part of the rift Gabon . In both areas, the axes of deeper grabens were dominated by organic-rich mudstone, which would become a prolific oil-prone source rock upon deeper burial Schoellkopf and Patterson, 2000 . Biostratigraphy, based mainly on ostracods, indicates that much of the synrift section, including Toca carbonates in northern Angola, is Barremian in age ostracod stages AS6 AS10 of Guardado et al., 1990 McHargue, 1990 Bate, 1999 . Our biostratigraphy and seismic stratigraphy are in accordance with those previous interpretations. Widespread faulting and graben creation greatly slowed or stopped in our study area near the end of the Barremian AS10 , based on seismically defined faulting and biostratigraphy. The Toca and adjacent presalt strata in northern Angola Cabinda area have been interpreted as lacustrine in many studies McHargue, 1990 Dale et al., 1992 Bate, 1999 Harris, 2000 Poropat and Colin, 2012 Quirk et al., 2013 . Previous interpretations of a lacustrine environment for presalt carbonates were based on numerous features 1 paleogeographic maps of offshore Angola, Congo, and Gabon show that those areas were separated from the open Atlantic Ocean by the Walvis Ridge prior to the middle Aptian Torsvik et al., 2009, and others 2 the presalt interval including Toca carbonate lacks in-place marine fossils Poropat and Colin, 2012 3 presalt strata contain ostracods indicative of a nonmarine lacustrine environment Bate, 1999 Poropat and Colin, 2012 and 4 stevensite, a mineral indicative of deposition in alkaline lakes Cerling, 1994 Wright, 2012 , is present in the Toca and Kwanza Basin presalt intervals Poropat and Colin, 2012 Wright, 2012 . Prior to deposition of the Loeme Salt, intense rifting and associated faulting stopped, and the basin went through a period of sag deposition. In more landward parts of the basin, sag deposition was minimal or dominated by siliciclastics Chela sandstones and equivalents Quirk et al., 2013 . Broad subsidence during deposition of the sag interval early to middle Aptian allowed accumulation of carbonates on structural highs currently in deep-water parts of offshore Angola and Brazil Carminatti et al., 2008 . Aptian regional subsidence allowed seawater to flood into the Kwanza and Congo Basins from the south. This initially caused widespread salt deposition during the late Aptian, followed by restricted marine carbonates and evaporites, and then open marine deposition latest Aptian to early Albian . Depositional environments became progressively deeper marine during the Late Cretaceous and early Paleogene Torsvik et al., 2009 . Cordeiro Gomes Ferreira, Paulo Marinho, Ma rio Dias, and Ma rio Caetano. Thanks are also due to the following people for isotope analyses James Rolfe of The Godwin Laboratory for Palaeoclimate Research, Department of Earth Sciences, University of Cambridge Adrian Boyce, The Scottish Universities Environmental Research Centre and John Craven, Ion Microprobe Facility, School of Geosciences, The University of Edinburgh. We are grateful to Schlumberger Multiclient and CGG Multiclient for giving us permission to use their seismic profiles. We also thank AAPG reviewers Toni Simo and Gabor Tari as well as subeditor Claudio Bartolini for help in publishing this article. METHODS Rock material used in this study came from conventional cores, rotary sidewall cores, and well cuttings. All were processed with routine protocols. Materials for thin sections were impregnated with blue plastic, and thin sections were stained with a solution containing Alizarin Red S and potassium ferricyanide as per Dickson 1966 . Carbon d 13C and oxygen d 18O isotope analyses of carbonates were run on approximately 250 mg samples of dried, homogenized carbonate sealed with silicone rubber septa and a Saller et al. 1137 Figure 1. A Paleoreconstruction showing the relative locations of South America left and Africa right at approximately 120 Ma Early Cretaceous . B Location of our study area, Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola. C Map of concession areas, offshore Angola, superimposed on Google Earth image. Cobalt International Energy operated Blocks 9, 20, and 21. Material shown in this paper is from those blocks. GEBCO General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans NAU Northern Arizona University NGA National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency NOAA National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce SIO Scripps Institution of Oceanography. screw cap in screw-cap vials. The samples were analyzed using a Thermo Gas Bench preparation system attached to a Thermo MAT 253 mass spectrometer in continuous flow mode. The results are reported with reference to the international standard, Vienna Peedee belemnite, and the precision is better than 0.08 for d 13C and 0.10 for d 18O. Bulk rock d 18O analyses were run on silica samples using laser fluorination. Ground samples were washed in a 15 hydrogen chloride HCl solution, rinsed, reacted with CIF3 to release oxygen that was converted to carbon dioxide CO2 by reaction with hot graphite, and analyzed by a VG Optima mass spectrometer. Reproducibility was better than 0.3 one standard deviation . The d 18O analyses were also run on silica samples using the Cameca IMS-4f ion microprobe. A focused primary beam of 133Cs ions was accelerated onto gold1138 Presalt Deposition Kwanza Basin coated, polished thin sections. Negative, high-energy secondary ions 18O- and 16O- were accelerated and focused into a mass spectrometer where the isotopes were magnetically separated and counted with an electron multiplier. Analytical precision using the secondary ion mass spectrometry technique was 1.0 . MINERALS In addition to siliciclastic detritus transported into depocenters in the Kwanza Basin, presalt strata contain various minerals precipitated from ions dissolved in the lake water. The main minerals precipitated in the presalt of the Kwanza Basin are listed in Table 1. Calcium carbonate can be precipitated as calcite or aragonite. Aragonite is very common in modern Figure 2. Schematic Cretaceous stratigraphy for the Kwanza Basin. Ages for geological stage boundaries are from Cohen et al. 2013 . Approximate locations of ostracod stages are from Poropat and Colin 2012 . shallow marine environments. Aragonite is metastable relative to calcite, and hence it has generally been transformed to calcite neomorphosed or otherwise replaced in most pre-Pleistocene carbonates throughout the world. Aragonite inclusions or relicts may remain in calcites neomorphosed from aragonite. Aragonite is not present in the existing presalt section. Calcite occurs in many forms, including mollusk shells many of which recrystallized from aragonite , dendritic shrubby growths, spherulites small, round grains with radiating crystals , ostracod shells, intraclasts, and micrite. All of these forms are compatible with deposition in a lake. No open marine fossils echinoderms, foraminifera, etc. have been found in the presalt section in this study. Calcite also occurs as an early and late cement. Dolomite is a common mineral in the presalt of the Kwanza Basin. Dolomite Figure 3A, B occurs as 1 a primary precipitate with no apparent precursor, 2 a diagenetic replacement of a precursor carbonate, and 3 a pore-filling cement. In many cases, it is difficult to prove that a specific occurrence of dolomite precipitated directly out of a lake, but in some intervals, dolomite crystalline dolomite occurs as evenly spaced crystals with no apparent precursor Figure 3A and hence could be primary. Other dolomites are clearly replacive Figure 3B . Microcrystalline dolomite that occurs in very organic-rich strata could also have precipitated directly out of lake water. Euhedral, delicately zoned dolomite crystals occurring in stevensite-rich layers are also likely primary, being precipitated directly out of the lake waters. In some intervals, dolomite crystals have been replaced by calcite Figure 3C dedolomite . Chert is variable in its occurrence but is locally abundant. Chert occurs as microbial boundstones that apparently precipitated from lake water, often on topographic highs. Thin chert beds are also present in more micritic intervals in sag platform deposits. Chert is also observed as a replacive mineral, especially in the synrift interval. Chalcedony Table 1. Minerals, Grains, and Other Structures Precipitated from Lake Waters Mineral Grains and Other Precipitated Material Calcite and aragonite CaCO3 Mollusk shells Spherulites Shrubs Ostracods Micrite Dolomite CaMg CO3 2 Layered dolomite crystals Microbialites Chert SiO2 Microbial boundstone Chalcedony syndepositional cement Stevensite Ca0.5,Na 0.33 Mg,Fe2 3Si4O10 OH 2 n H2O Saponite Ca0.1Na0.1Mg2.25Fe2 0.75Si3AlO10 OH 2 4 H2O Clay mud Peloids Ooids Saller et al. 1139 Figure 3. Thin-section photomicrographs from Kwanza Basin presalt strata. Thin sections were stained with Alizarin Red S. Calcite appears red, and porosity is blue. A Dolomite with euhedral-tosubhedral crystals that may have precipitated directly out of lake waters primary dolomite . Clay dark brown is present between dolomite crystals. B Dolomite that has replaced originally calcitic grains. C Calcite in shapes of dolomite rhombs pink indicating that dolomite initially precipitated with the stevensite brown and then was calcitized, probably in the shallow subsurface, because of changing magnesium calcium in the lake water dedolomite . D Spherulites red in stevensite clay brown . E Small spherulites red in stevensite clay brown . F Dolomite rhombs light brown to white in stevensite clay medium to dark brown . G Stevensite oolitic coatings and grains light brown with intergranular quartz cement white . and quartz cements are locally common in cherty microbial boundstones. Under certain geochemical conditions very high alkalinity , clay can precipitate from lake water Wright and Barnett, 2015 . These clay minerals include stevensite, saponite a member of the stevensite family , and sepiolite. Stevensite has been repeatedly identified in the presalt of the Kwanza Basin. Stevensite is observed 1 precipitated in beds with dolomite or calcitic spherulites Figure 3D F , 2 precipitated in isolated layers, 3 as oolitic coatings on grains in the lower part of the synrift Figure 3G , 1140 Presalt Deposition Kwanza Basin and 4 in trace amounts in other carbonate facies, including shrubby microbialites. SAG DEPOSITIONAL FACIES The presalt of the Kwanza Basin contains many depositional facies. Many facies are confined to the sag Aptian , whereas other facies are confined to the synrift Barremian Figure 4 . Several siliciclastic-rich or mud-rich facies occur in both the synrift and sag intervals. Some of the presalt facies exhibit Figure 4. Schematic stratigraphic model for presalt in the Kwanza Basin. The top surface shows a depositional model facies and bathymetry for the upper sag. packst packstone. characteristics similar to those that accumulate in fluvial and marine environments, whereas others are distinctly different. In general, mollusks are absent in the sag interval. Ostracods are also absent in most of the sag interval, but they do occur in a few beds. Several different forms of microbialites are present in the sag. Laminae with transported grains or mud deposited trapped on microbial mats are extremely rare. Microbial boundstone textures are dominated by carbonate or silica that was apparently precipitated in or on the boundstone structure, giving morphologies similar to modern marine coral and coralline algal reefs. Other types of grains in the sag include spherulites, intraclasts, and peloids. The main carbonate and chert facies identified in the central-to-western parts of Kwanza Basin in the sag interval are described below. Shrubby Boundstone The shrubby boundstone facies morphologic description similar to Chafetz and Guidry, 1999 Wright and Barnett, 2015 consists of upward bifurcating, dendritic carbonate branches that are commonly 1 5 mm 0.04 0.20 in. across and occur in layers 1 mm 0.04 in. to 70 cm 28 in. thick Figures 5 and 6 . Layers of shrub-like growths simplified to shrubs are interrupted by mud or grain-rich laminations and layers. Elongate primary pores vugs are common between branches. Shrub branches generally consist of radiating bundles of fibrous-to-prismatic calcite crystals. Within a shrub branch, upwardoriented bundles of radiating fibrous crystals have clear growth interference however, the fibrous, upward-oriented bundles abruptly end at the edge of a branch, leaving open vugs between shrubby growths Figures 5 and 6 . The shrubs appear to have grown upward and created positive relief. Many shrubs have dark, irregular laminations and erosional embayments Figure 7A D . Some shrubs show micritization at the terminations of fibrous crystal growths. Some of the best-preserved shrubs are microporous. The irregularly shaped micropores are crudely arranged along concentric and radial patterns and are secondary Figure 7E . Small, irregularly shaped dolomite crystals are present within most shrubs. Cores of extensively altered shrubs had macropores that were sometimes filled with large zoned dolomite crystals and are sometimes still open. Shrubby calcite is pseudopleochroic in thin section because of fluid-filled pores inclusions . Shrub calcites contain, on average, 3000 ppm strontium. A spotted cathodoluminescent pattern Figure 7F indicates that even the best-preserved shrubs have been recrystallized. Some shrubs have been dolomitized. Dolomite crystals are common in pores adjacent to shrubby growths Figures 5B 6E 7A D . The dolomite crystals are generally euhedral to subhedral, show multiple zones in cathodoluminescence, and range in abundance from absent to filling almost all pore space between shrubby growths. Petrographically, they grew after the adjacent shrubby calcite however, the dolomites appear to be diagenetically early. This facies has been interpreted to form in a very saline to-alkaline lacustrine environment in the presalt of Brazil Wright and Barnett, 2015 . A general lack of calcareous biota mollusks, ostracods suggests Saller et al. 1141 Figure 5. Core photograph A and photomicrographs B F of shrubby boundstones. A Shrubby growth light brown with dendritic upward branches alternating with grainstone intervals dark layers . B Calcitic shrub showing upward growth, with dark inclusions and an embayment arrow probably related to microbial erosion. Stained with Alizarin Red S. Calcite is red. Porosity is blue. C Cross-polarized view of B . Fibrous calcite crystals with radiating extinction and vertical crystal orientations. D Shrubby growth. E Cross-polarized view of D . Bundles of fibrous calcite crystals with radiating extinction and crystal orientations. F Close up of black rectangle in D . Crosspolarized view with bundles of fibrous calcite crystals with radiating extinction and crystal orientations. deposition of this facies in a stressed very saline to alkaline environment Van Damme and Gautier, 2013 . Presalt shrubs have been suggested to be microbial inferred from statements in Carminatti et al., 2008 and abiotic by others Dorobek et al., 2012 Wright and Barnett, 2015 . These dendritic structures are similar to biotic reefal organisms growing toward light and appear to be creating positive structures similar to reefs. Dark, organic laminations and erosional embayments support microbial influence, but there are bundles of fibrous calcite without organic laminations or embayments that could be abiotic. The lack of sediment and early fibrous crystals in voids between branches suggests a barrier or baffle to water flow between the top of the shrub and open vugs below. A microbial mat or 1142 Presalt Deposition Kwanza Basin biofilm at the top of the shrubby growth might not have been the cause of the calcareous precipitate, but it could have prevented sediment from falling between the shrub branches and might have stopped supersaturated waters from percolating down and precipitating cements between the branches. No evidence of an original aragonite precursor has been identified in the shrubs. In marine carbonates, neomorphic calcite replacing aragonite is typically coarse, irregularly shaped crystals that cut across original fabrics and often contain aragonite inclusions. This fabric is not found in shrubs examined in the Kwanza Basin, although there are some shrubs with prismatic calcites that appear replacive Figure 7D . Although shrubby calcites contain high strontium concentrations similar to elevated strontium concentrations in Figure 6. Core photographs A D and photomicrograph E . A Dendritic shrubby growth. B Dendritic shrubby growth S is overlain by intraclastic grainstone G with one shrub growth that grew above the others. Shrubs grew on a grain-rich layer with incipient shrubby growths SG . C Intervals of dendritic shrubs alternating with grain-rich layers. D Close up of dendritic shrub showing vuggy porosity between shrubs. E Shrubby calcitic growth red with dolomite crystals white to light brown in pores between shrub growths. Stained with Alizarin Red S causing calcite to appear red. Porosity is blue. neomorphosed marine aragonite Saller, 1992 , the presalt lake waters probably contained high amounts of dissolved strontium, making it possible to incorporate the high amount of strontium observed in the shrubs by calcite precipitated directly from lake water. Even the best-preserved shrubs have a spotted cathodoluminescent pattern Figure 7F indicating that they had some transformation. The shrubs likely were originally deposited as magnesium Mg -rich calcites and have transformed to low-Mg calcite. Microbial Chert Boundstone and Lithoclast Breccia Talus Microbial chert boundstones and chert lithoclast breccias are commonly interbedded and hence are described and interpreted together. Microbial chert boundstones frequently form isolated buildups basinward of sag platforms and occur as buildups on the basinward margin of platforms Figure 4 . On slabs, this facies ranges from light brown to dark gray and forms pillars, thick branches 2 10 cm 0.8 3.9 in. across , domes, and layers Figure 8 . Primary vuggy porosity is common in the chert microbialites. The chert is frequently fractured, unlike adjacent dolomites and limestones. Chert-rich microbial boundstones commonly alternate with dolomite. The chert often shows a clotted texture microporous or dark brown Figure 9A C that is reminiscent of microbial structures described by Chafetz and Guidry 1999 , Guidry and Chafetz 2003 , and Scholle and UlmerScholle 2003 . The chert has an open, porous fabric showing no signs of compaction. The dark-brown Saller et al. 1143 Figure 7. A D Photomicrographs of shrubby calcitic growths pink with dark microcrystalline bands and dolomite white-to light-brown crystals between shrubby growths. Stained with Alizarin Red S causing calcite to appear red. Pore spaces are blue. A Area in red rectangle is shown in B . B Area in red rectangle in A . Area in yellow rectangle is shown in C . C Close up of yellow rectangle in B . Note dark microcrystalline alteration bands at end of shrubby growth arrow . D Cross-polarized view of B . Prismatic crystals arrows indicate recrystallization. E Backscatter image showing inclusions in a shrub that are oriented parallel to crystal growth to upper right . F Cathodoluminescence image showing patchy luminescence in a shrubby growth with fibrous crystals. clots are surrounded by transparent, microcrystalline quartz Figure 9A , and the larger pores are lined with layers of botryoidal, colloform chalcedony Figure 9C . Some cherts contain abundant spherical bodies, 20 mm across Figure 8D , that are similar to silicified cyanobacteria coccoid Pleurocapsa found in chert in modern Lake Magadi, Kenya and shown in Behr 2002 . The fractures in the chert appear randomly oriented, and many are open, whereas others are partially filled with sediment and calcite cement Figure 9D . Results of d 18O analyses on cherts are shown in Figure 9E and Tables 2 and 3. Lithoclast breccias are frequently associated with cherty microbial boundstones. Most clasts are angular microbial cherts, some with truncated chalcedony cements Figure 9F . Clasts range in size from less than 1 mm 0.04 in. to tens of centimeters across. Crusts of chalcedony cements grew on clasts, significantly reducing interclast porosity Figure 9F however, 1144 Presalt Deposition Kwanza Basin significant porosity remains between clasts. Some clasts have layers of chalcedony that were truncated by erosion prior to deposition in the breccia Figure 9F . At this time, we do not have good modern or ancient analogs for these microbial chert buildups. Morphologically, these pillars and branching forms with microbial structures are similar to Pavilion Lake British Columbia, Canada buildups Laval et al., 2000 , but those are calcitic. These microbial chert mounds amalgamate to form buildups that are seismically mappable, being as much as 200 m 656 ft thick and 1 2 km 0.6 1.2 mi across. Those microbial chert buildups coalesce into reefal structures that are more than 10 km 6 mi long and more than 5 km 3 mi wide. Silica chert precipitated in microbial mats was described by Al Rajaibi et al. 2015 in the Proterozoic of Oman, but those microbially mediated cherts formed in relatively thin layers, not thick, reef-like mounds. Figure 8. Core photographs of microbial chert facies. A Thick branches of microbial chert light brown in a dark-brown dolomite matrix. Branches have fractures filled with dark dolomite. B Boundstone with dark microbial branches and vaselike growths at the bottom. White crusts of chalcedony and quartz cement partially filled vugs between microbial chert. Some vugs remain open arrows . This piece of core also has many open fractures. C Domal microbial chert light to medium brown . D Thin-section photomicrograph of chert. Microcrystalline quartz is white. Small spherical bodies approximately 20 mm in diameter are filled with blue plastic. Many of the spherical bodies contained small air bubbles now blue . These are similar to the microbial reproductive cells baeocytes of Behr 2002 . Petrographic and stable isotopic data indicate that these microbial chert boundstones grew as reefs at low surface temperatures. Petrographically, most vugs appear to be depositional, generally lacking truncations typical of dissolution. The breccias are interpreted as reef talus because of the poor sorting and angular nature of the clasts. The clasts are generally reefal material microbial chert boundstones . Clasts contain truncated layers of chalcedony cement, indicating that the chalcedony cements grew syndepositionally and were eroded Figure 9F . The general absence of ostracods and mollusks suggests very saline or alkaline lake waters. Lake Magadi chert shows some petrographic similarities to these cherts, but they do not form isolated buildups or reefs along margins of platforms. The spherical reproductive cells or baeocytes are found in the Lake Magadi chert and modern lake water and exhibit an internal concentric structure capsule , whereas most of those Kwanza structures are molds. The Magadi capsules are 5 to 20 mm in diameter similar to ours the larger capsules are inferred to grow under conditions of high evaporation, high salinities, periodic desiccation, and intense ultraviolet radiation the smaller capsules lived in deeper waters Behr, 2002 . These cherts are associated with cyanobacteria mats. Chalcedony is also common in the siliceous sediment and gels in Lake Magadi Behr, 2002 . The clotted chert and early chalcedony cements commonly have d18O values of approximately 40 standard mean ocean water SMOW Figure 9E Tables 2 and 3 . Cherts from the saline lakes of East Africa show similar high isotope ratios. Higher d 18O values are correlated with rising salinity. Exceptionally high d 18O values 39 to 44 , SMOW were obtained for Lake Magadi chert by O Neil and Hay 1973 , who also found saturated Lake Magadi water to have d18O values of 7 SMOW , whereas warm spring waters were approximately -3 SMOW . Assuming that the Kwanza surface waters had a temperature of 25 C 77 F , chert with a d 18O value of 40 SMOW would precipitate from water with a d 18O of approximately 6 SMOW , indicating similar highly evaporated water Figure 10 Ligang et al., 1989 . This makes a hydrothermal origin for the Saller et al. 1145 Figure 9. Thin-section photomicrographs of chert facies. A Chert with clotted darkbrown microbial structures, with crusts of chalcedony cement light brown arrows and quartz cement white . Residual vuggy porosity remains blue . B Chert with clotted microbial structures blue brown where microporous . Quartz cement white coats the microbial fabric. Vuggy porosity remains V blue . C Microbial boundstone. Chert with clotted microbial structures brown or blue brown where microporous . Chalcedony cements arrows light brown to light blue where microporous partially fill a vug V . An irregular fracture F is filled with quartz cement. D Fractured chert. Fractures are partially filled by calcite cement red and partially open blue . Fractures have multiple orientations. Stained with Alizarin Red S. E Reflected-light photograph of chert, chalcedony cement, and quartz cement showing oxygen isotope d18O results from ion probe isotopic analyses. F Intraclast lithoclast breccia with layers of chalcedony light brown and quartz cement white . Clast arrow with truncated chalcedony cements indicates syndepositional precipitation of silica cements. SMOW standard mean ocean water. Kwanza cherts highly unlikely, because an increase in temperature would require an even higher d 18O value for the water cherts in hydrothermal sinters from Yellowstone have d 18O values of 6 to 22 SMOW Shanks et al., 2007 . The open vugs in the Kwanza chert are often lined by megaquartz crystals. The youngest last parts of these crystals have d 18O values approaching 30 SMOW Figure 9E Table 3 . The present subsurface formation waters have d 18O values of approximately 4 SMOW , so quartz would precipitate at a temperature of approximately 66 C 150 F from those waters Figure 10 . The present formation temperature is approximately 95 C 203 F , implying that quartz precipitation stopped before the formation 1146 Presalt Deposition Kwanza Basin reached its present burial depth. Uncertainties exist for these quartz calculations 1 precipitation is required to be at equilibrium reasonable for these euhedral crystals , and 2 several quartz water fractionation equations are available hence, the Ligang et al. 1989 equation that we used might not be exactly appropriate. Layered Spherulite Intraclast Packstone Grainstone Spherulite intraclast packstone grainstones occur on sag platforms in the Kwanza Basin Figures 4, 11 and are generally calcitic, but sometimes they contain dolomite. Some of the packstone grainstones are Table 2. Oxygen Isotope Laser Fluorination Analyses of Bulk Rock Silica Samples Number 1 2 3 4 5 Type of Silica d18O SMOW Chert Chert Chert Light brown chert Dark brown chert 36.9 41.4 38.9 41.2 44.6 Abbreviations SMOW standard mean ocean water. dominated by intraclasts, but others are dominated by spherulites, and still others are a mixture of intraclasts and spherulites. Spherulites are small, spherical grains composed of radiating fibrous-to-prismatic calcite crystals Wright and Barnett, 2015. Intraclasts include fragments of shrubs and hybrid carbonate grains that are intermediate between spherulites and shrubs. Some of the spherulites and hybrid grains were probably moved by currents, whereas others appear to have grown and been deposited in place. Intergranular porosity is common in this facies Figure 11 . Our interpretation is that lack of mud carbonate or siliceous suggests deposition in an environment where currents prevented deposition of mud. Presence of intraclasts indicates that currents capable of eroding and transporting grains more than 0.2 mm 0.008 in. across were active. Hence, the spherulite intraclast packstone grainstones are interpreted as being deposited in a shallow environment with frequent, strong currents. Spherulite Wackestone Packstone Spherulite wackestone packstones Figures 4, 12 are a common facies in the sag interval. Spherulites range Table 3. Oxygen Isotope Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry Analyses for Sequence of Silica Minerals Shown in Figure 9E Point Type of Silica d18O SMOW Standard Error 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 Chert Chert Chert Chert Chert Cement band of chalcedony Cement band of chalcedony Cement band of chalcedony Cement band of chalcedony Cement band of chalcedony Cement band of chalcedony Drusy quartz Drusy quartz Drusy quartz Drusy quartz Drusy quartz Drusy quartz Drusy quartz Megaquartz Megaquartz Megaquartz Megaquartz Megaquartz Megaquartz Megaquartz 40.2 40.4 40.3 40.0 40.2 40.3 38.2 39.7 38.9 38.8 39.5 40.3 39.2 37.1 38.8 41.3 36.6 35.4 31.1 30.3 33.8 33.3 31.8 32.6 33.1 0.248 0.287 0.279 0.400 0.353 0.312 0.446 0.265 0.422 0.461 0.340 0.348 0.343 0.383 0.367 0.323 0.362 0.282 0.191 0.118 0.361 0.345 0.315 0.349 0.373 The first sample point is in replacement chert on the left the last sample point is in megaquartz against open pore on the right . Abbreviations SMOW standard mean ocean water d18O oxygen isotope. Saller et al. 1147 Figure 10. Graphical representation of equilibrium relationship between oxygen isotope d 18O value of water, temperature, and the d 18O value of quartz from Ligang et al. 1989 . The curves indicate the isotope ratio of the solid quartz in per mil relative to standard mean ocean water. The secondary ion mass spectrometry probe analysis points for d 18O are shown in Figure 9E and given in Table 3. Possible equilibrium points for a chert with a d 18O value of 40 and a quartz with a d 18O value of 30 are shown. SMOW standard mean ocean water. in size from silt to sand 0.03 2 mm 0.001 0.08 in. across . The material between the spherulites ranges from clay-rich mud stevensite to coalescing dolomite crystals. Spacing between spherulites ranges from coalesced spherulites to widely spaced spherulites surrounded by dolomite or clay Figures 3D, E 12E, F . Spherulites are locally dolomitized, though they are most commonly calcite. Spherulites have been interpreted to form in muddy sediments or gels at the sediment water interface involving waters supersaturated with respect to calcite Tosca and Wright, 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2015 . Both muddy sediments and gels require lake waters deep enough to have little current agitation. The absence of ostracods and mollusks suggests a very stressed environment probably saline and alkaline lake waters . Stevensite Clay with Calcitic Spherulites or Dolomite Rhombs Stevensite with calcitic spherulites or dolomite rhombs is a common facies in the sag interval Figure 3D G . Stevensite is an aluminum-poor, Ca Mg smectitic clay. Spherulites or dolomite rhombs range in abundance from very sparse to touching and grade to spherulitic wackestone packstones and crystalline dolomites. This facies is commonly laminated, with clays compacting around the spherulites or dolomite rhombs. Stevensite is generally more abundant in areas off structural highs. 1148 Presalt Deposition Kwanza Basin Stevensite precipitates in highly alkaline lake waters pH 9 Khoury et al., 1982 Jones, 1986 Tosca and Wright, 2015 . Precipitation of calcitic spherulites indicates that these waters were also calcium rich and supersaturated with respect to calcite, and precipitation with dolomite indicates lake waters that were magnesium rich and hence supersaturated with respect to dolomite. The abundance of clay in this facies supports deposition in a low-energy environment with no significant currents to winnow the clay out. The abundance of stevensite off structure suggests deposition mainly in deeper water. Hence, the stevensite facies was generally deposited in deeper parts of silicarich, highly alkaline lakes. Crystalline Dolomite Crystalline dolomite beds are commonly associated with and gradational to spherulite wackestones, stevensite mudstones, or organic mudstones. The crystalline dolomites generally lack grains and may contain clay Figure 3A . The dolomite crystals are generally euhedral and widely spaced in these crystalline dolomites. Crystalline dolomites lack features indicative of replacement, i.e., replaced grains. Our interpretation is that the presence of widely spaced crystals suggests precipitation of dolomite directly from lake water supersaturated with respect to dolomite. No evidence of currents exists. Evidence for the lack of currents includes interbedding with deeper-water facies stevensite-rich or organic-rich mudstones and the presence of mud, which suggests deposition in waters that lacked strong currents. Intermediate Hybrid Facies The sag interval contains some transitional grain types and facies that do not fit into the categories above. Strata with irregular calcitic grains that appear to be hybrids of spherulites and shrubs Figure 13A, B are widespread and occur in wackestones, packstones, grainstones, and shrubby boundstones. Coalescing, fibrous calcite crystals that are similar to botryoidal marine cements Figure 13C occur in some samples. Our interpretation is that the sag lake was, at least at times, supersaturated with respect to calcite. The exact morphology of calcitic precipitate was a function of depositional water energy, degree of supersaturation, and substrate, with spherulites growing in muddy sediments and shrubs growing in shallow, high-energy, highly supersaturated environments. The hybrids of spherulites and shrubs probably formed in transitional in time or space environments between low-energy muddy and high-energy grain-rich or shrub-rich sediments. The botryoidal cements, which are fairly rare, could have precipitated in an internal reefal cavity or perhaps at the sediment water interface, similar to shrubs. UPPER SYNRIFT FACIES Because our drilling has focused on structural highs in the presalt, most wells have not penetrated the lower synrift interval that is generally confined to grabens in the Kwanza Basin Figure 4 . Shallow water strata in the upper synrift interval are very different from the sag. Upper synrift facies were deposited in the late stages of rift-related faulting and are generally upper Barremian ostracod stages AS9 AS10 . Most upper synrift strata on depositional highs are limestones with mollusks, especially bivalves Figure 4 . Mollusk Grainstones, Packstones, and Wackestones Upper synrift strata on structural highs in the Kwanza Basin contain mollusk grainstones, packstones, and Figure 11. A Core photograph of a current laminated intraclast spherulite grainstone. B Thin-section photomicrograph of a porous intraclast grainstone. Stained with Alizarin Red S causing calcite to appear red. Porosity is blue. Saller et al. 1149 Figure 12. Thin-section photomicrographs of spherulites in the sag interval. Stained with Alizarin Red S. Calcite appears red, and porosity is blue. A Calcitic spherulite with radiating bundles of fibrous crystals in an argillaceous dolomite matrix. B View of A under cross-polarized light showing radiating bundles of fibrous crystals. C Calcitic spherulite with wedge-shaped calcite crystals. Dolomite light brown and porosity blue are adjacent to spherulites. D View of C under cross-polarized light showing wedge-shaped crystals in the spherulite. E Calcitic spherulites red with radiating bundles of fibrous crystals and wedge-shaped crystals. Space between spherulites is filled with dolomite light brown . F View of E under cross-polarized light showing radiating bundles of fibrous crystals and wedge-shaped crystals. wackestones Figures 14A, B 15A F . Mollusk grainstones and packstones are commonly referred to as coquinas. Mollusks include bivalve and gastropod shells. Bivalves occur as whole shells and fragments, and they are the dominant grain type in most synrift grainstones, packstones, and wackestones. Gastropod shells are abundant in a few intervals. This facies is dominantly limestone with some dolomite Figures 14B, 15G and silicified intervals. A few ostracods are present in this facies Figure 15F , but, except for a few intervals, they are not volumetrically significant. 1150 Presalt Deposition Kwanza Basin Thompson et al. 2015 provides an excellent summary of coquinas in the Lower Cretaceous of the South Atlantic and modern environments. The presence of mollusks indicates a lake with moderate-to-low salinities for example, mollusks are not present in highly saline lakes like the Great Salt Lake, Utah Eardley, 1938 . Grainstones were probably deposited in highenergy environments or at least during high-energy events. Mollusk packstones with whole shells could have accumulated in an area with abundant living mollusks. The mollusk packstones may have also been deposited by episodic currents. Mollusk wackestones were deposited in relatively quiet waters low energy . Other Upper Synrift Facies Although mollusk-rich strata are the main facies in the upper synrift, some other facies are present. Ostracods Figure 15F are concentrated in wackestones, packstones, or grainstones in a few beds, though these beds are relatively rare in the upper synrift. Unfossiliferous dolomites occur in the uppermost part of this interval. Dolomitic mudstones and silicified ooid packstones and grainstones are also present in a few other intervals in the upper synrift. Ostracods can live in environments deeper and more saline than mollusks, and they can become abundant in those stressed environments Flu gel, 1982 Scholle and Ulmer-Scholle, 2003 . Hence, ostracods in the absence of mollusks suggest an environment either relatively deep or very saline. Ostracods are small, so even gentle currents can move them and winnow out muds, forming ostracod grainstones. Ostracod wackestones and packstones could have accumulated in deeper, low-energy environments. The absence of mollusks and ostracods in dolomitic mudstones suggests times when the upper synrift lakes became too saline for mollusks and ostracods. Ooid grainstones probably accumulated in lacustrine environments with continual or repeated agitation, similar to some windward coastlines in the modern Great Salt Lake Eardley, 1938 . FACIES PRESENT IN BOTH SAG AND UPPER SYNRIFT Several siliciclastic facies are present in both the synrift and sag intervals. Sandstones, siltstones, conglomerates, and those same lithologies mixed with shells are found in the synrift and sag intervals in Figure 13. Thin-section photomicrographs. Thin sections were stained with Alizarin Red S causing calcite to be red. A Irregular hybrid calcitic grain pink showing preferential upward growth causing a grain that is intermediate between a shrub and a spherulite. Dolomite light brown fills spaces between calcitic grains. B View of A under cross-polarized light showing radiating bundles of fibrous crystals. C Coalescing botryoids of fibrous cements. All dolomite. Cross-polarized light. Saller et al. 1151 Figure 14. Core photographs of presalt facies. A Mollusk packstone with leached shells causing moldic porosity. Black color is caused by oil staining. B Dolomitized mollusk packstone grainstone with open vugs and fractures. C Conglomerate with sandstone S and siliciclastic mudstone M . Clasts include quartzite Q , gneiss G , and schist H . D Conglomerate with green sandstone and siltstone clasts and thick white mollusk shells. E Green fine-grained sandstone with whole bivalve shells. F Laminated silt-rich and lime-rich mudstone with a syndepositional desiccation crack filled with sediment. eastern parts of the basin. Organic-rich mudstones and clay-rich mudstones also occur in both the upper synrift and sag in many parts of the Kwanza Basin. Conglomerate and Coarse Sandstone Conglomerates and coarse sandstones Figure 14C are observed in more landward areas of the Kwanza Basin in both synrift and sag intervals Figure 4 . Clasts in conglomerates are up to 10 cm 4 in. across and include metamorphic gneiss as well as siliceous mudstone and limestone clasts. Conglomerates are commonly massive or show upward fining to sands Figure 14C . Sandstones are coarse to fine grained, and many have current laminations. 1152 Presalt Deposition Kwanza Basin Most conglomerates and sandstones are interpreted as deposited in fluvial-to-alluvial fan environments. This interpretation is suggested by their 1 coarse grained nature, 2 local upward fining, 3 local current laminations, 4 deposition in landward parts of the basin, and 5 lack of calcareous fossils indicative of lacustrine environments. Shelly Conglomerate and Sandstone The shelly conglomerate and sandstone facies was also observed in more landward parts of the Kwanza Basin Figure 14D . Clasts in conglomerates are up to 5 cm 2 in. across and include clasts of metamorphic gneiss. Thick calcareous mollusk shells are also present. Figure 15. Thin-section photomicrographs of synrift strata. All views except F were stained with Alizarin Red S, and calcite is red. A Grainstone composed of mollusk fragments with equant calcite cements filling primary intergranular porosity. Mollusk fragments were dissolved and then filled with equant calcite cement. B Mollusk grainstone with neomorphosed shell fragments. Intergranular pores are lined with quartz cements white , and substantial intergranular porosity remains blue . C Mollusk grainstone with neomorphosed bivalve shells B and intergranular porosity blue . Intergranular porosity was reduced by calcite cement arrows . D Mollusk packstone with bivalve shells and fragments, intergranular micrite dark , and porosity blue . E Mollusk packstone grainstone with neomorphosed bivalve shells B , an ostracod arrow , and open pores blue . F Lime wackestone with mollusk fragments M and ostracod shells arrows in lime mud dark . G Porous dolomite with a dissolved mollusk shell elongate pore arrow and late calcite cement red . H Laminated silty, dolomitic, organic-rich mudstone. Sandstones are coarse to fine grained, and many have current laminations. Thick mollusk shells are indicative of shallow, fresh-to relatively low-salinity lacustrine environments similar to Lake Tanganyika, East Africa Cohen and Thouin, 1987 Cohen, 1989 . The coarse siliciclastic material is typical of fluvial deposits. The mixture of mollusk shells and coarse siliciclastic grains suggests episodic input of coarse siliciclastic sediment into a lake. This mixture of sediment is common in fan deltas, where alluvial sediments are carried into the margin of a lake or ocean. Green Fine Sandstone and Siltstone The green fine sandstone and siltstone facies Figure 14E is present in wells in the landward parts of the basin in both synrift and sag intervals. These strata are horizontally laminated in some intervals and bioturbated in other intervals. Mollusk shells are present in some parts of this facies. The presence of mollusk shells suggests deposition in the shallow part of a lake. Abundant sand and silt indicate proximity to an active siliciclastic source. This facies is interpreted as being Saller et al. 1153 deposited on the landward side of a lake margin in the eastern part of the basin. Light-Colored Mudstone Light-colored mudstones are present in some land-ward eastward wells Figure 14F . Millimeter laminations, thicker centimeter layering, and synsedimentary disruption cracks are present. This facies is generally unfossiliferous. Our interpretation is that the abundance of mud suggests a low-energy environment. Fine laminations suggest episodic deposition. The light gray and brown color suggests an oxidized depositional environment. Cracks filled with sediment Figure 14F are consistent with brief exposure and desiccation. This facies was probably deposited on mud flats at or slightly above the average lake level. Organic-Rich Mudstone Organic-rich mudstones Figure 15H are a critical part of the Kwanza Basin petroleum system. These mudstones are dark and have total organic carbon contents of 1 10 wt. . Organic material is commonly amorphous kerogen with high hydrogen indexes typical of lacustrine deposition and similar to the Bucomazi Formation Hauterivian Aptian Figure 2 in the Lower Congo Basin Schoellkopf and Patterson, 2000 . The mudstones range from dolomitic to calcareous to clay rich. The mudstones are commonly unfossiliferous however, some contain significant amounts of calcitic ostracods. Organic-rich mudstones occur in both the synrift and sag intervals Barremian to lower upper Aptian . Organic-rich mudstones are observed accumulating in deeper water in modern East African Rift lakes Scholz et al., 2003 . Similar organicrich mudstone facies in the Bucomazi Formation of northern Angola are interpreted as deposited in deeper, anoxic lacustrine environments Harris, 2000 Schoellkopf and Patterson, 2000 . Hence, organic-rich mudstone facies in the presalt of the Kwanza Basin are interpreted as deposited in deep lacustrine environments. These are the main source rocks in the presalt. 1154 Presalt Deposition Kwanza Basin Siliceous Mudstone Siliceous mudstones range from pure clay to silt and sand rich to carbonate rich. They occur as interbeds in the synrift and in deeper-water areas of the sag. Sometimes the siliceous mudstone facies contains spherulites or dolomite and has a gradational transition to dolomites and spherulitic wackestones. Our interpretation is that siliceous mudstones accumulated in various presalt environments. Some siliceous mudstones are autochthonous, with clays precipitating directly from lake water, and hence are gradational to stevensite-rich facies described earlier. Other clays are detrital, the product of weathering, erosion, transportation, and deposition. The deposition of clay requires a low-energy environment with currents too weak to transport the clays. The preferential occurrence of stevensite on the flanks of structures suggests that those low-energy environments were deeper water, below wave base. Detrital clay could also be transported and deposited in deep water. Detrital clay could be associated with rivers and deposited on flood plains or delta fronts however, we have not identified any clays deposited on flood plains or delta fronts, though we have little data in areas where we would expect this. DIAGENESIS Sag Diagenesis Often, there is not a clear separation between precipitation of depositional carbonate and early diagenesis on the lake floor during sag deposition. For example, spherulites are interpreted to precipitate on the lake floor and in sediments during very shallow burial. In general, we will consider spherulites and shrubby microbial material as depositional and adjacent dolomite as slightly later and diagenetic. Crystalline dolomites precipitated directly out of lake water are considered depositional. Thin sections, x-ray diffraction analysis, and well log analysis indicate that most of the middle and upper sag is a mixture of calcite and dolomite with an average of approximately 65 calcite and 30 dolomite, with the remaining 5 including clay, chert, sand, silt, and other materials. Some samples are composed entirely of calcite and others of dolomite, but most parts of the sag are mixtures. Calcitic grains and microbial calcites generally precipitated early and form the framework of the rock. Dolomite occurs as crystals in pores, and in some areas it replaces original calcareous sediments and results in substantial porosity. In other areas, dolomite occludes porosity between calcitic grains. Early dolomite in the sag interval has relatively high d 18O values of 1 to 5 Peedee belemnite PDB and d 13C values of 1 to 3 PDB Figure 16 . Dolomite is the main diagenetic product observed in the sag interval. Many other diagenetic products are present, but they are volumetrically minor and not discussed here. Much dolomite in the sag appears to form diagenetically early. Dolomite crystals adjacent to shrubs and spherulites contain manganese up to 8000 ppm and were probably precipitated during very shallow burial, when the pore water became separated from oxidized lake water. It is possible that a reducing environment and microbial mediation helped promote dolomite precipitation in the very shallow subsurface Vasconcelos et al., 1995 Vasconcelos and McKenzie, 1997 . The sag dolomites have an average d 13C value of 2.1 10 samples standard deviation 0.4 , which is similar to the spherulites and shrubs Figure 16 and reflects the dissolved carbon in the lake water. The sag dolomites have an average d 18O value of 2.2 10 samples standard deviation 1.3 . Uncertainty exists over the isotopic fractionation for oxygen in dolomite, but the high d 18O values in the dolomite maximum value of 4.4 support precipitation from evaporated lake water at 25 C 30 C 77 F 86 F using equations in Friedman and O Neil, 1977 Land, 1985 , similar to the chert. Diagenesis in many parts of the sag interval is minor, perhaps because the connate waters during early and moderate burial were relatively saline and less reactive than freshwater. Synrift Diagenesis Diagenesis in much of the synrift is intense and includes calcite cementation, calcite and aragonite dissolution, calcitization neomorphism of originally aragonitic mollusks, dolomitization replacing calcitic material, saddle dolomite cements, replacive chert, silica cement, and stylolites. Equant calcite cements fill many intergranular pores and molds of originally aragonite grains Figure 15A E . Most mollusk shells have been Figure 16. Stable isotope data from a well through a presalt carbonate platform. The synrift calcites have generally lower carbon isotope d 13C and oxygen isotope d 18O values than sag carbonates, though some overlap is present. PDB Peedee belemnite. either dissolved Figure 14A , and sometimes infilled with equant calcite cement Figure 15A, B, D , or calcitized neomorphosed Figure 15C, E . Dolomite has replaced some mollusk-rich limestones Figures 14B, 15G . Saddle dolomite coarse dolomite with curved cleavage planes and undulose extinction patterns occurs in a few places as a paragenetically late, pore-filling cement. In the synrift, chert occurs as a replacive phase. Quartz cements are also present Figure 15B . Stylolites, although relatively rare in the sag section, are more common in the synrift section. The isotopic composition of diagenetic calcites is variable Figure 16 . Most neomorphic calcites have moderate d 18O values -2.5 to 2 , PDB and d 13C values -0.5 to 2 , PDB . Calcite cements filling mollusk molds have d 18O values of -5 to 0.5 PDB and d 13C values of -1.5 to 1.5 PDB . Calcite cements filling intergranular pores have lower d 18O values -6 to -3 , PDB and moderate d 13C values 0.5 to 2 , PDB Figure 16 . Our interpretation is that diagenesis of synrift strata occurred in the shallow subsurface as well as during deep burial. Freshwaters probably entered the synrift interval at the unconformity at the top of the synrift. It is likely that the synrift interval was also periodically exposed to freshwater during deposition. The d 18O data separate the early freshwater cements in molds d 18O of -2 to 1 , PDB from the late calcite cements d 18O of -6 to -3 , PDB . Late calcite cements may have been derived from pressure Saller et al. 1155 solution at stylolites. Diagenetic chert, saddle dolomite, and quartz are likely products of hydrothermal alteration. Relatively intense diagenetic alteration in synrift carbonates compared with the sag might be resulting from repeated influxes of reactive freshwater during shallow and moderate burial. The synrift is also at slightly greater depths than the sag interval, which may have caused increased pressure solution stylolites and cementation during deep burial. DEPOSITIONAL SYSTEMS IN THE SAG INTERVAL The sag interval is the upper part of the presalt in the Kwanza Basin and is generally overlain by evaporites of the Loeme Salt. The sag interval extends over most structural highs and thickens off structure Figure 4 . The sag is lower to lower upper Aptian and includes the upper part of ostracod zone A10 as well as AS11 and AS12 from Bate 1999 . The sag can be further divided into a lower sag interval AS10 AS11 and an upper sag interval AS11 AS12 . Bate 1999 interpreted deposition in this area and during this time period to be dominated by saline lakes. Our depositional facies and stable isotope compositions support that interpretation. The d 18O compositions of carbonate phases in the sag are generally heavier higher d 18O than the synrift Figure 16 , which supports deposition in more evaporated water in the sag Gat, 1996 . The higher d 13C values in the sag also indicate deposition in more evaporated lake waters than the synrift Talbot, 1990 . Distinct mounds identified from seismic data Figure 17A occur in isolated buildups, but they can also be identified along the margins of depositional platforms. Isolated mound buildups are found primarily in the lower sag and have lithologies and depositional facies that are very different from platform facies however, both pass laterally off structure into deeper-water, more organic-rich facies similar to modern Lake Tanganyika Cohen and Thouin, 1987 Cohen, 1989 Scholz et al., 2003 . Seismic data also show platforms in the sag interval Figure 17B . Isolated Buildups Isolated buildups formed on paleohighs during deposition of the lower sag interval Figure 4 . Large, 1156 Presalt Deposition Kwanza Basin isolated buildups contain smaller internal mounds that are commonly 100 200 m 328 656 ft thick and 1 2 km 0.6 1.2 mi across Figure 17A . The main facies in the isolated buildups is microbial chert boundstone with thick branches, pillars, and domal morphologies and internal, growth-related cavities Figures 4, 8, 9 . Other lithologies and facies in the isolated buildups include 1 dolomites some replacive wackestone packstones and grainstones and some primary precipitates, including dolomitic microbialites , 2 limestones with fibrous shrubby growth structures and grainstones containing spherulites and intraclasts, and 3 coarse packstones and grainstones with clasts of chert lithoclast breccias . Carbonate Platforms Lacustrine carbonate platforms developed on broad structural highs during deposition of the sag interval Figure 4 . Lacustrine platforms are up to 20 50 km 12 31 mi long, 10 20 km 6 12 mi wide, and 200 350 m 656 1148 ft thick, and they are seismically mappable Figure 17B . The building blocks of these platforms are carbonate grains and reefal organisms that are very different from marine carbonates. Shrubby microbial boundstones are the main reefal material identified in sag platforms, but spherulites and intraclasts are also major carbonate grains. Shrubby boundstones and spherulite intraclast grainstones are important reservoir facies in the middle of the platforms and decrease off structure Figure 4 . Wackestones and packstones with calcareous grains and intergranular dolomite occur as interbeds on the crest of the platforms and thicken to the margins of the platforms Figure 4 . Stevensite in dolomitic or spherulitic mudstones and wackestones increases with stratigraphic depth in the sag and is also more abundant on the flanks of the platforms. Chert beds 1 cm 0.4 in. to 200 cm 80 in. thick are scattered throughout the platform strata. Some chert beds contain distinct microbial structures suggesting that they are boundstones, but other chert beds were probably deposited as either fine muddy silica or fine muddy carbonate that was replaced by silica. Silicified ostracods are present in many cherts, but ostracods are rare in most other sag carbonates. Shrubby boundstones and spherulite intraclast grainstones generally increase in abundance upward, becoming abundant in Figure 17. Prestack-depth-migrated seismic data. A Profile over an isolated buildup showing three internal mounds that amalgamate in three dimensions. Profile does not go through the thickest parts of the center and left mounds. Excellent reservoir occurs in microbial cherts in the internal mounds. B Profile over a presalt carbonate platform in the sag interval. Shrubby boundstones and grainstones occur on the platform top. Figure 4 shows schematically where these lines fit on a depositional profile and link seismic with depositional facies shown on core photographs and thin-section photos. the uppermost part of the sag in the middle of platforms Figure 4 . Off-Structure Mud-Rich Strata Mud-rich facies include organic-rich mudstones and stevensite with spherulites or dolomite. Both types of mud-rich rocks generally lack mollusks but contain ostracods in a few intervals. These mud-rich facies occur 1 in the lower part of the sag on platforms, 2 on the flanks of platforms, and 3 above isolated buildups in deeper areas Figure 4 . Interpretation of Sag Depositional System The sag interval is interpreted as deposited at various depths in highly saline and alkaline waters Figure 4 . The lack of mollusks in what appear to be relatively shallow water deposits on platforms and isolated buildups suggests that these lacustrine environments were too saline and alkaline for mollusks to thrive. This is also supported by the scarcity of ostracods except in what appear to be flooding and deepening events similar to Wright and Barnett, 2015 . The presence of stevensite clay provides additional evidence for highly alkaline lake water pH 9 Khoury et al., 1982 Jones, 1986 Tosca and Wright, 2015 . Isolated chert-rich buildups are dominated by clotted structures characteristic of microbial deposition Chafetz and Guidry, 1999 Guidry and Chafetz, 2003 Scholle and Ulmer-Scholle, 2003 . In other locations in the basin, many cherts are replacive, but a depositional origin is indicated for these microbial cherts by depositional clasts containing chert with microbial structures and chalcedony cements that are truncated at the edges of the clasts Figure 9F . In addition, the d 18O compositions for the microbial cherts and chalcedony d 18O of 39 40 , SMOW are only compatible with precipitation at relatively cool surface temperatures 23 C 27 C 73 F 81 F in highly saline waters d 18O of 5 6 , SMOW Figure 10 . The buildup morphology and lack of progradation suggest deposition during transgressions associated with relatively rapid lake level rises. These isolated buildups are located west basinward of the upper sag lacustrine platforms and are structurally deeper than platforms Figure 4 . The Pleistocene and Holocene buildups at Pyramid Lake, northwest Nevada Benson, 1994, 2004 Della Porta, 2015 are good morphologic analogs for these buildups, but they are calcitic, rather than chert dominated. A marked change in facies from microbial Saller et al. 1157 chert boundstones up to organic-rich or stevensiterich muds suggests a rapid deepening in the upper sag. That lake level rise caused carbonate deposition to shift to paleohighs to the east, resulting in carbonate platforms developed along the Atlantic hinge line Figure 4 . Marls with stevensite, spherulites, and dolomite generally appear to be deposited in shallower water than organic-rich muds, but lake circulation and chemistry oxidation and alkalinity independent of depth are also factors in variations between organicrich muds and stevensite-rich marls. Stevensite requires very high alkalinity, but that high alkalinity could extend from substantial water depths to shallow oxidized waters. Deposition of organic-rich muds requires anoxic conditions that are common in deep water and could not occur in shallow, oxidized waters. Sag platforms have distinct lateral and vertical facies patterns Figure 4 . In the middle of the platforms, spherulite wackestones and packstones in the lower sag pass upward to intraclast spherulite packstone grainstones and shrubby boundstones, indicating a general shallowing during deposition of the upper sag. The widespread occurrence of shrubby boundstones and intraclast spherulite packstone grainstones in the middle of the platforms Figure 4 suggests that shallow, relatively high-energy environments were widespread, resulting in widespread stratified porosity and permeability on the platform top. DEPOSITIONAL SYSTEMS IN THE UPPER SYNRIFT INTERVAL The upper synrift in the Kwanza Basin can be divided into three general areas 1 eastern, siliciclastic rich 2 central, platform and 3 western, basinward Figure 4 . carbonates increase and coarse sandstones and conglomerates decrease to the west. The lower synrift contains mollusk packstones and grainstones with interbeds of organic-rich mudstones along the flanks of half grabens in eastern parts of the Kwanza Basin. Central, Platform Area The central Kwanza Basin contains a lower synrift middle to lower Barremian section that is generally confined to presalt half grabens and an upper synrift section that had deposition extending over structural highs Figure 4 . The centers of half grabens are expected to be organic-rich muds, similar to the Bucomazi Formation Hauterivian Aptian of northern Angola Schoellkopf and Patterson, 2000 . On structural highs, the upper synrift is dominated by mollusk grainstones coquinas and mollusk wackstone packstones Figure 4 . Packstones and grainstones are dominant at the top of the synrift and common throughout the upper synrift on depositional highs. Ostracod-rich zones occur sporadically in the middle and lower part of the upper synrift. The top of the upper synrift has a sharp contact with overlying mud-rich units. Vuggy, dissolution-related porosity is common at the top of the synrift. Seismic data show the lowest sag strata onlapping the top of synrift on structural highs. Western, Basinward Area The synrift section in the western Kwanza Basin contains various lithologies and facies. On structural highs, thin mollusk wackestones, packstones, and grainstones are interbedded with several facies, including lime mudstones, ostracod wackestones, organic-rich carbonate mudstones, siliceous mudstones, and dolomites. Our wells do not penetrate synrift half grabens in axial positions, but we infer these areas to be dominated by organic-rich mudstones. Eastern, Siliciclastic-Rich Area Interpretation The eastern Kwanza Basin contains an upper synrift section that is characterized by conglomerate and coarse sandstone, shelly conglomerate and sandstone, and green fine sandstone and siltstone facies Figure 4 . Mollusk-rich limestones and dolomites are also present in some intervals. In general, mollusk-rich 1158 Presalt Deposition Kwanza Basin The upper synrift is characterized by mollusk shells and fragments coquinas in contrast to the sag interval, which is largely devoid of mollusk fragments. This suggests that the upper synrift was deposited in relatively freshwater lakes with mollusk packstones and grainstones on the depositional highs and organicrich mudstones in depositional lows, similar to Lake Tanganyika Cohen and Thouin, 1987 Cohen, 1989 Scholz et al., 2003 . Stable isotopic compositions of upper synrift limestones Figure 16 are consistent with deposition in relatively fresh to moderately evaporated lake water Talbot, 1990 . The upper synrift interval is similar to the Toca T3 upper Barremian interval in the Lower Congo Basin of northern Angola and Republic of Congo Harris, 2000 . This interval also corresponds to the presalt Phases 5-6 AS9 AS10 of Bate 1999 , which are interpreted as a time of relatively fresh to moderately saline lakes. Mollusk grainstones preferentially accumulated in shallow lake environments with at least occasional currents. Interbedding of mollusk grainstones and deep-water organic mudstones in parts of the basin in the upper Barremian suggests rapid, high-amplitude lake level rises and falls, similar to those observed at the Great Salt Lake during the last 15,000 yr Eardley et al., 1957 . Several features suggest a significant unconformity at the top of the synrift 1 a sharp lithology change from mollusk-rich limestones up to organic-rich mudstones 2 seismic onlap onto the upper synrift surface, which is characteristic of sequence boundaries unconformities Vail, 1987 Van Wagoner et al., 1988 3 vuggy porosity immediately below the top synrift, likely formed by karst-related dissolution 4 early calcite cements that have crystal morphologies similar to freshwater cements Longman, 1980 and 5 isotope compositions of calcite cements similar to low-temperature meteoric cements Figure 16 . RESERVOIR CHARACTERISTICS Presalt wells producing from the sag interval in Brazil have had impressive flow rates, with production of more than 25,000 barrels of oil per well per day for several years PreSalt.com, 2015 . Flow tests from the Kwanza Basin have also been impressive, with rates of more than 5000 BOE per day in tests limited by surface facilities Cobalt International Energy, 2012, 2013, 2014 . The best reservoir facies in the upper sag platforms in the Kwanza Basin are generally shrubby microbial boundstones and intraclastic grainstones. Shrubby boundstones have high permeabilities associated with their primary pores between shrub branches Figures 5 7 . Those pores are elongate almost planar and have pore throats that are similar in width to the rest of the pore network. Microbial cherts are the dominant reservoir facies in the isolated buildups. Vugs and fractures are common in microbial cherts Figures 8 and 9 and directly relate to the high permeabilities observed in well tests. Spherulitic wackestones and packstones often have moderate-to-poor porosity and low permeability, but have a high enough porosity and permeability to be considered pay in some intervals. Mollusk packstones and grainstones coquinas are the main reservoir facies in the upper synrift interval. The effective porosity in mollusk packstones and grainstones coquinas is controlled by diagenesis. In grainstones, porosity is primarily found where intergranular cements are minimal Figure 15B, C . In some intervals, mollusks were preferentially dissolved, creating moldic porosity Figure 14A . Early dissolution associated with freshwater and late dissolution associated with hydrothermal fluids have resulted in connected vugs in some intervals. Other parts of the synrift contain porosity associated with dolomitization, silicification and associated fractures, or partial silicification and preserved intergranular or moldic porosity Figure 15B, G . DISCUSSION Many geological controversies have emerged from studies of the presalt of the South Atlantic Wright and Barnett, 2015 , and our data have a bearing on six of these discussions 1 similarities of Kwanza Basin presalt to Brazil presalt, 2 influence of marine water, 3 origin of the shrubby facies microbial or abiotic and relation to travertines, 4 origin of spherulites and association with stevensite and porosity, 5 original mineralogy and possible recrystallization of shrubs and spherulites, and 6 origin of cherts depositional or diagenetic. Similarities of Kwanza Basin Presalt to Brazil Presalt Little has been published on the presalt in the current deep-water part of Brazil however, bits that have been published make the Brazilian presalt appear similar to what is observed in the Kwanza Basin. As Saller et al. 1159 Quirk et al. 2013 show, the Kwanza Basin was adjacent to the Campos Basin, offshore Brazil, during the early stages of rifting. Carminatti et al. 2008 show carbonate platforms in Brazil that are similar to carbonate platforms that we observe in the sag Figures 4 and 17B . We suspect that the clean microbialite reservoirs described by Carminatti et al. 2008 immediately below salt are similar to our shrubby boundstone facies and may also include grainstone facies that we observe on Kwanza platforms. Descriptions of shrubby facies by Wright and Barnett 2015 in rocks inferred to be in the Tupi Lula field area are similar to ours. Carminatti et al. 2008 describe coquinas deeper in the section, similar to the synrift in the Kwanza Basin. Influence of Marine Water Similar to Wright and Barnett 2015 , we did not recognize any distinctly marine fossils in the presalt. Interestingly, planktonic foraminifera were in places observed from cuttings in the presalt interval however, those foraminifera were dated as Albian, indicating contamination of the cuttings, not foraminifera in the presalt. An unconformity at the top of the presalt carbonate is overlain by interbedded dolomites and anhydrites, with anhydrites becoming more abundant and massive upward until the section passes into halite. The interbedded dolomite and anhydrite succession is probably part of the initial marine transgression that also deposited the Loeme salt. Origin of the Shrubby Facies Microbial or Abiotic and Relation to Travertines Arguments have been made by Dorobek et al. 2012 and Wright and Barnett 2015 that the shrubby facies of Brazil is largely abiotic. A major argument for an abiotic origin is the common fibrous nature of crystals in the shrubs that suggests rapid precipitation similar to some travertines and marine cements Wright and Barnett, 2015 . Although the shrubs observed in the Angola presalt commonly have fibrous-to-prismatic crystals, those crystals generally have an upward orientation and growth pattern Figure 5 . Vertically elongate vugs generally remain open adjacent to fibrous bundles of calcite crystals, suggesting that the fibrous-to-prismatic crystals in the shrubs are not 1160 Presalt Deposition Kwanza Basin simple pore-filling cement otherwise, they would have also filled the adjacent pores. Botryoids of fibrous calcite cement crystals similar to marine cements occur in a few locations Figure 13C , but they are distinctly different from most shrubby boundstones. Micritization and erosion embayments in the shrubs suggest alteration and local erosion by microbes Figures 5B 7A C . A microbial mat or biofilm at the top of the shrubby growth might not have been the cause of the calcareous precipitate, but it could have prevented sediment from falling between the shrub branches and could have prevented or at least slowed supersaturated waters from percolating down and precipitating cements between the branches. Even within the width of a core, shrubs and domal microbial growths show differential vertical growth and the ability to create depositional highs Figures 5A 6A, B , similar to modern coral and coralline algal reefs. This preferential vertical growth toward sunlight would be consistent with photosynthetic microbial organisms. This type of vertical growth may have allowed microbial growths to build upon each other and perpetuate as depositional highs. Although some of the shrubby fabrics resemble travertine, most of the shrubby facies studied in the Kwanza Basin are not interpreted as travertine. We agree with the eloquent reasoning of Wright and Barnett 2015 on this subject. Several other features do not support a travertine origin 1 stable oxygen isotope analyses are consistent with low temperature, not high temperature, precipitation 2 the porosity interval that includes the shrubby facies has seismic attributes that extend over an area that is approximately 8 km 5 mi long and 5 km 3 mi wide in the middle of the platform and 3 shrubby facies are repeatedly interbedded with normal lacustrine facies, including spherulitic wackestone packstone, mudstones, and intraclastic grainstones with intraclasts of shrubby facies, suggesting that the shrubby facies is a normal, repeated, lacustrine depositional facies. Origin of Spherulites and Association with Stevensite and Porosity Spherulites are common in both the Brazil and the Angola presalt sag interval. Spherulites have been interpreted as forming by displacive growth in the very shallow subsurface Dorobek et al., 2012 Wright and Barnett, 2015 . Wright and Barnett 2015 also reason that the waters in Brazil lakes were highly alkaline, which is consistent with the highly alkaline waters interpreted for Kwanza sag environments. The lack of calcitic, micritic mud in the presence of spherulites is striking. Magnesium silicate gels have been suggested as a critical factor in spherulite precipitation Tosca and Wright, 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2015 . Where spherulites occur with stevensite, it is logical to interpret Mg silicate gels as a factor associated with spherulite precipitation. However, in many other locations, spherulites are not associated with stevensite, and hence we interpret spherulite precipitation as occurring in other types of lake-bottom sediment and possibly even microbial gels. In all cases, the lakebottom waters were supersaturated with respect to calcite. Original Mineralogy and Possible Recrystallization of Shrubs and Spherulites We agree with Wright and Barnett 2015 that the original mineralogy of most of the shrubs and spherulites was probably calcite. Cathodoluminescence patterns suggest some recrystallization in shrubby facies and spherulites, but prismatic crystals parallel original fibrous crystals and tend to not cut across the original crystal fabric Figures 7F . Mollusks in the synrift show calcitization neomorphism of aragonite, similar to that observed in marine carbonates, but very different from calcite crystal fabrics in shrubs and spherulites. Equant calcite crystals commonly cut across original crystal fabrics in calcitized aragonites in mollusk shells Figure 15C, E . Many calcite crystals in shrubs and spherulites are still fibrous, whereas others are prismatic to wedge shaped, but the margins of the prismatic and wedge-shaped crystals still follow the original radiating fabric in spherulites and are vertically oriented growth fabrics in shrubs Figures 7D and 12 . Spherulites and shrub calcite have high strontium concentrations average strontium concentration of 3000 ppm . Although these are elevated similar to neomorphosed marine aragonite, we explain these as related to generally high strontium concentrations in the highly saline and alkaline lake water. Origin of Cherts Depositional or Diagenetic Cherts are a major reservoir facies in isolated buildups on basinward structures in the Kwanza Basin Figure 4 and appear to be the result of silica precipitation at low temperatures associated with microbial growths. We have not found close analogs in other locations. Silica precipitation in hydrothermal sinters associated with microbes has been widely documented and is in some ways similar Braunstein and Lowe, 2001 Guidry and Chafetz, 2003 . Clasts with truncated chalcedony cements in the presalt indicate that silica was precipitated during reef-like deposition. The very high d 18O values of the microbial cherts and chalcedonies indicate deposition in highly evaporated waters at relatively low temperatures. Seismic data indicate that these microbial cherts occur as buildups 200 m 656 ft thick and 1 2 km 0.6 1.2 mi across, and they are not associated with faults or any apparent conduits for hydrothermal waters. As Wright and Barnett 2015 note, the presalt sag lake waters were very alkaline, with high concentrations of dissolved silica. In other parts of the basin, vertical seismic discontinuities pipes and planes suggest deep-seated conduits for hydrothermal fluids. Hydrothermal fluids would have passed through substantial amounts of volcanic material, which could have contributed silica that was ultimately piped into the sag lake or lakes however, we do not see evidence for hydrothermal vents being directly responsible for the large microbial mounds in basinward parts of the Kwanza Basin. CONCLUSIONS Lacustrine sedimentation has resulted in many unusual carbonate and chert facies in the presalt of the Kwanza Basin. The upper synrift is dominated by mollusk packstones and grainstones coquinas deposited in the shallow part of relatively fresh lakes. Organic-rich mudstones were deposited in deeper water adjacent to depositional highs in both the upper synrift and sag. Sag deposition occurred in highly evaporated, highly alkaline lake water. Shrubby microbial boundstones and intraclastic grainstones were deposited in shallow, moderate- to high-energy water on broad lacustrine platforms during deposition of the sag interval Figure 4 . Wackestones and packstones with calcitic spherulites in a dolomitic to argillaceous Saller et al. 1161 matrix were deposited in slightly deeper lake water on the flanks of the structures and on top of the structures during intraformational transgressions. Microbial chert boundstones formed buildups on isolated structural highs basinward of the sag platforms Figure 4 . An excellent petroleum system exists in the presalt in the Kwanza Basin. After substantial burial, oil and gas were generated from organic-rich muds deposited in presalt lows. Oil generation probably started in the deeper parts of synrift grabens during and shortly after upper sag deposition. Generation of oil probably continues to the present in organic-rich parts of the sag. Excellent reservoir facies shrubby microbial boundstones, intraclast grainstones, and microbial cherts developed on carbonate platforms and on isolated highs basinward of the platforms. The Loeme salt was deposited over the presalt interval, giving an excellent vertical seal to hydrocarbons maturing below and causing oil and gas to be trapped in reservoir rocks in the uppermost presalt. REFERENCES CITED Al Rajaibi, I. M., C. Hollis, and J. H. MacQuaker, 2015, Origin and variability of a terminal Proterozoic primary silica precipitate, Athel Silicilyte, South Oman Salt Basin, Sultanate of Oman Sedimentology, v. 62, p. 793 825, doi 10.1111 sed.12173. Bate, R. H., 1999, Non-marine ostracod assemblages of the pre-salt rift basins of West Africa and their role in sequence stratigraphy, in N. R. Cameron, R. H. Bate, and V. S. Clure, eds., The oil and gas habitats of the South Atlantic Geological Society, London, Special Publications 1999, v. 153, p. 283 292, doi 10.1144 GSL.SP .1999.153.01.17. Behr, H.-J., 2002, Magadiite and Magadi chert A critical analysis of the silica sediments in Lake Magadi, Kenya, in R. W. Remaut and G. M. Ashley, eds., Sedimentation in continental rifts SEPM Special Publication 73, p. 257 273, doi 10.2110 pec.02.73.0257. Benson, L. V., 1994, Carbonate deposition, Pyramid Lake subbasin, Nevada 1. Sequence of formation and elevational distribution of carbonate deposits tufas Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, v. 109, p. 55 87, doi 10.1016 0031-0182 94 90118-X. Benson, L. V., 2004, The tufas of Pyramid Lake, Nevada US Geological Survey Circular 1267, 14 p. Braunstein, D., and D. R. Lowe, 2001, Relationship between spring and geyser activity and the deposition and morphology of high temperature 73 C siliceous sinter, Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming, U.S.A. Journal of 1162 Presalt Deposition Kwanza Basin Sedimentary Research, v. 71, p. 747 763, doi 10.1306 2DC40965-0E47-11D7-8643000102C1865D. Carminatti, M., B. Wolff, and L. Gamboa, 2008, New exploratory frontiers in Brazil Proceedings of the 19th World Petroleum Congress, Madrid, Spain, June 29 July 3, 2008, 11 p. Cazier, E. C., C. Bargas, L. Buambua, S. Cardosa, H. Ferreira, A. Lopez, T. Nicholson, C. Olson, A. Saller, and J. Shinol, 2014, Petroleum geology of Cameia field, deepwater pre-salt Kwanza Basin, Angola, West Africa AAPG Search and Discovery article 20275, accessed January 9, 2015, http www.searchanddiscovery.com documents 2014 20275cazier ndx cazier.pdf. Cerling, T. E., 1994, Chemistry of closed basin lake waters A comparison between African Rift Valley and some central North American rivers and lakes, in E. H. GierlowskiKordesch and K. Kelts, eds., The global geological record of lake basins Cambridge, United Kingdom, Cambridge University Press, p. 29 30. Chafetz, H. S., and S. A. Guidry, 1999, Bacterial shrubs, crystal shrubs, and ray-crystal shrubs Bacterial versus abiotic precipitation Sedimentary Geology, v. 126, p. 57 74, doi 10.1016 S0037-0738 99 00032-9. Cobalt International Energy, 2012, Press releases, accessed September 20, 2015, http www.cobaltintl.com newsroom press releases. Cobalt International Energy, 2013, Press releases, accessed September 20, 2015, http www.cobaltintl.com newsroom press releases. Cobalt International Energy, 2014, Press releases, accessed September 20, 2015, http www.cobaltintl.com newsroom press releases. Cohen, A. S., 1989, Facies relationships and sedimentation in large rift lakes and implications for hydrocarbon exploration Examples from lakes Turkana and Tanganyika Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, v. 70, p. 65 80, doi 10.1016 0031-0182 89 90080-1. Cohen, A. S., and C. Thouin, 1987, Nearshore carbonate deposits in Lake Tanganyika Geology, v. 15, p. 414 418, doi 10.1130 0091-7613 1987 15 414 NCDILT 2.0.CO 2. Cohen, K. M., S. C. Finney, P. L. Gibbard, and J.-X. Fan, 2013, The ICS international chronostratigraphic chart Episodes, v. 36, p. 199 204. Dale, C. T., J. R. Lopes, and S. Abilio, 1992, Takula oil field and the greater Takula area, Cabinda, Angola Chapter 13, in M. T. Halbouty, ed., Giant oil and gas fields of the decade 1978 1988 AAPG Memoir 54, p. 197 215. Davison, I., 2007, Geology and tectonics of the South Atlantic Brazilian salt basins, in A. C. Ries, R. W. H. Butler, and R. H. Graham, eds., Deformation of the continental crust The legacy of Mike Coward Geological Society, London, Special Publications 2007, v. 272, p. 345 359, doi 10.1144 GSL.SP.2007.272.01.18. Della Porta, G., 2015, Carbonate build-ups in lacustrine, hydrothermal and fluvial settings Comparing depositional geometry, fabric types and geochemical signature, in D. W. J. Bosence, K. A. Gibbons, D. P. Le Heron, W. A. Morgan, T. Pritchard, and B. A. Vining, eds., Microbial carbonates in space and time Implications for global exploration and production Geological Society, London, Special Publications 2015, v. 418, p. 17 68, doi 10.1144 SP418.4. Dickson, J. A. D., 1966, Carbonate identification and genesis as revealed by staining Journal of Sedimentary Petrology, v. 36, p. 491 505. Dorobek, S. I., L. Piccoli, B. Coffey, and A. Adams, 2012, Carbonate rock-forming processes in the pre-salt sag successions of Campos Basin, offshore Brazil Evidence for seasonal, dominantly abiotic carbonate precipitation, substrate controls, and broader geologic implications AAPG Hedberg Conference Microbial Carbonate Reservoir Characterization, Houston, Texas, June 4 8, 2012, AAPG Search and Discovery article 90153, accessed September 7, 2015, http www.searchanddiscovery.com pdfz abstracts pdf 2012 90153hedberg abstracts ndx dorobek.pdf.html. Eardley, A. J., 1938, Sediments of Great Salt Lake, Utah AAPG Bulletin, v. 22, no. 10, p. 1305 1411. Eardley, A. J., V. Gvosdetsky, and R. E. Marsell, 1957, Hydrology of Lake Bonneville and sediments and soils of its basin Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 68, p. 1141 1201, doi 10.1130 0016-7606 1957 68 1141 HOLBAS 2.0.CO 2. Fairhead, J. D., and W. Wilson, 2005, Plate tectonic processes in the South Atlantic Ocean Do we need deep mantle plumes in G. R. Fougler, J. H. Natland, D. C. Presnall, and D. L. Anderson, eds., Plates, plumes, and paradigms Geological Society of America Special Paper 388, p. 537 553, doi 10.1130 0-8137-2388-4.537. Flu gel, E., 1982, Microfacies analysis of limestones New York, Springer-Verlag, 633 p., doi 10.1007 978-3-642-68423-4. Friedman, I., and J. R. O Neil, 1977, Compilation of stable isotope fractionation factors of geochemical interest US Geological Survey Professional Paper 440-K, 12 p. Gat, J. R., 1996, Oxygen and hydrogen isotopes in the hydrologic cycle Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, v. 24, p. 225 262, doi 10.1146 annurev.earth .24.1.225. Greenhalgh, J., R. Borsato, F. Mathew, G. Duncan-Jones, I. Pimenta, J. Marques da Silva, and L. Narciso da Silva, 2012, Petroleum plays and prospectivity in the Kwanza and Benguela Basins of offshore Angola AAPG Search and Discovery article 10443, accessed January 14, 2014, http www.searchanddiscovery.com documents 2012 10443greenhalgh ndx greenhalgh.pdf. Guardado, L. R., L. A. P. Gamboa, and C. F. Lucchesi, 1990, Petroleum geology of the Campos Basin, Brazil A model for a producing Atlantic-type basin, in J. D. Edwards and P. A. Santogrossi, eds., Divergent-passive margin basins AAPG Memoir 48, p. 3 80. Guidry, S. A., and H. S. Chafetz, 2003, Anatomy of siliceous hot springs Examples from Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming, USA Sedimentary Geology, v. 157, p. 71 106, doi 10.1016 S0037-0738 02 00195-1. Harris, N. B., 2000, Toca carbonate, Congo Basin Response to an evolving rift lake, in M. R. Mello and B. J. Katz, eds., Petroleum systems of South Atlantic margins AAPG Memoir 73, p. 341 360. Jones, B. F., 1986, Clay mineral diagenesis in lacustrine settings, in F. A. Mumpton, ed., Studies in diagenesis US Geological Survey Bulletin 1578, p. 291 300. Khoury, H. N., D. D. Eberl, and B. F. Jones, 1982, Origin of magnesium clays from the Armargosa Desert, Nevada Clays and Clay Minerals, v. 30, p. 327 336, doi 10 .1346 CCMN.1982.0300502. Land, L. S., 1985, The origin of massive dolomite Journal of Geological Education, v. 33, p. 112 125. Laval, B., S. L. Cady, J. C. Pollack, C. P. McKay, J. S. Bird, J. P. Grotzinger, D. C. Ford, and H. R. Bohm, 2000, Modern freshwater microbialite analogues for ancient dendritic reef structures Nature, v. 407, p. 626 629, doi 10.1038 35036579. Ligang, Z., L. Jingxiu, Z. Huanbo, and C. Zhensheng, 1989, Oxygen fractionation in the quartz-water-salt system Economic Geology and the Bulletin of the Society of Economic Geologists, v. 84, p. 1643 1650, doi 10 .2113 gsecongeo.84.6.1643. Longman, M. W., 1980, Carbonate diagenetic textures from nearsurface diagenetic environments AAPG Bulletin, v. 64, no. 4, p. 461 487. McHargue, T. R., 1990, Stratigraphic development of protoSouth Atlantic rifting in Cabinda, Angola A petroliferous lake basin, in B. J. Katz, ed., Lacustrine basin exploration Case studies and modern analogs AAPG Memoir 50, p. 307 326. O Neil, J. R., and R. L. Hay, 1973, 18O 16O ratios in cherts associated with the saline lake deposits of east Africa Earth and Planetary Science Letters, v. 19, p. 257 266, doi 10.1016 0012-821X 73 90126-X. Poropat, S. F., and J.-P. Colin, 2012, Early Cretaceous ostracod biostratigraphy of eastern Brazil and western Africa An overview Gondwana Research, v. 22, p. 772 798, doi 10.1016 j.gr.2012.06.002. PreSalt.com, 2015, Production by well, accessed September 20, 2015, http www.presalt.com en pre-salt-production brazilian-pre-salt-production-by-well . Quirk, D. G., M. Hertle, J. W. Jeppesen, M. Raven, W. U. Mohriak, D. J. Kann, M. N rgaard, et al., 2013, Rifting, subsidence and continental break-up above a mantle plume in the central South Atlantic, in W. U. Mohriak, A. Danforth, P. J. Post, D. E. Brown, G. C. Tari, M. Nemc ok, and S. T. Sinha, eds., Conjugate divergent margins Geological Society, London, Special Publications 2013, v. 369, p. 185 214, doi 10.1144 SP369.20. Saller, A. H., 1992, Calcitization of aragonite in Pleistocene limestones of Enewetak Atoll, Bahamas, and Yucatan An alternative to thin-film neomorphism Carbonates and Evaporites, v. 7, p. 56 73, doi 10.1007 BF03175393. Schoellkopf, N. B., and B. A. Patterson, 2000, Petroleum systems of offshore, Cabinda, Angola, in M. R. Mello and B. J. Katz, eds., Petroleum systems of South Atlantic margins AAPG Memoir 73, p. 361 376. Scholle, P. A., and D. Ulmer-Scholle, 2003, A color guide to the petrography of carbonate rocks Grains, textures, porosity, diagenesis AAPG Memoir 77, 474 p. Saller et al. 1163 Scholz, C. A., J. W. King, G. S. Ellis, and P. K. Swart, 2003, Paleolimnology of Lake Tanganyika, East Africa over the past 100 kyr Journal of Paleolimnology, v. 30, p. 139 150, doi 10.1023 A 1025522116249. Shanks, W. C. III, J. C. Alt, and L. A. Morgan, 2007, Geochemistry of sublacustrine hydrothermal deposits in Yellowstone Lake Hydrothermal reactions, stable-isotope systematics, sinter deposition, and spire formation US Geological Survey Professional Paper 1717G, p. 205 234. Talbot, M. R., 1990, A review of the palaeohydrological interpretation of carbon and oxygen isotopic ratios in primary lacustrine carbonates Chemical Geology Isotope Geoscience Section, v. 80, p. 261 279, doi 10.1016 0168-9622 90 90009-2. Thompson, D. L., J. D. Stilwell, and M. Hall, 2015, Lacustrine carbonate reservoirs from Early Cretaceous rift lakes of Western Gondwana Pre-salt coquinas of Brazil and West Africa Gondwana Research, v. 28, p. 26 51, doi 10 .1016 j.gr.2014.12.005. Torsvik, T. H., S. Rousse, C. Labails, and M. A. Smethurst, 2009, A new scheme for the opening of the South Atlantic Ocean and the dissection of an Aptian salt basin Geophysical Journal International, v. 177, p. 1315 1333, doi 10.1111 j.1365-246X.2009.04137.x. Tosca, N. J., and V. P. Wright, 2015, Diagenetic pathways linked to labile Mg-clays in lacustrine carbonate reservoirs A model for the origin of secondary porosity in the Cretaceous pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, offshore Brazil, in P. J. Armitage, A. R. Butcher, J. M. Churchill, A. E. Csoma, C. Hollis, R. H. Lander, J. E. Omma, and R. H. Worden, eds., Reservoir quality of clastic and carbonate rocks Analysis, modelling and prediction Geological Society, London, Special Publications 2015, v. 435, doi 10.1144 SP435.1. Vail, P. R., 1987, Seismic stratigraphy interpretation using sequence stratigraphy. Part 1 Seismic stratigraphy interpretation procedure, in A. W. Bally, ed., Atlas of 1164 Presalt Deposition Kwanza Basin seismic stratigraphy AAPG Studies in Geology 27, p. 1 10. Van Damme, D., and A. Gautier, 2013, Lacustrine mollusc radiations in the Lake Malawi Basin Experiments in a natural laboratory for evolution Biogeosciences, v. 10, p. 5767 5778, doi 10.5194 bg-10-5767-2013. Van Wagoner, J. C., H. W. Posamentier, R. M. Mitchum, P. R. Vail, J. F. Sarg, T. S. Loutit, and J. Hardenbol, 1988, An overview of the fundamentals of sequence stratigraphy and key definitions, in C. K. Wilgus, B. S. Hastings, C. G. St, C. Kendall, H. W. Posamentier, C. A. Ross, and J. C. Van Wagoner, eds., Sea-level changes An integrated approach Tulsa, Oklahoma, SEPM Special Publication 42, p. 39 45, doi 10.2110 pec.88.01.0039. Vasconcelos, C., and J. A. McKenzie, 1997, Microbial mediation of modern dolomite precipitation and diagenesis under anoxic conditions Lagoa Vermelha, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Journal of Sedimentary Research, v. 67, p. 378 390. Vasconcelos, C., J. A. McKenzie, S. Bernasconi, D. Grujic, and A. J. Tien, 1995, Microbial mediation as a possible mechanism for natural dolomite formation at low temperatures Nature, v. 377, p. 220 222, doi 10.1038 377220a0. Wright, V. P., 2012, Lacustrine carbonates in rift settings The interaction of volcanic and microbial processes on carbonate deposition, in J. Garland, J. E. Neilson, S. E. Laubach, and K. J. Whidden, eds., Advances in carbonate exploration and reservoir analysis Geological Society, London, Special Publications 2012, v. 370, p. 39 47, doi 10.1144 SP370.2. Wright, V. P., and A. J. Barnett, 2015, An abiotic model for development of textures in some South Atlantic early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates, in D. W. J. Bosence, K. A. Gibbons, D. P. Le Heron, W. A. Morgan, T. Pritchard, and B. A. Vining, eds., Microbial carbonates in space and time Implications for global exploration and production Geological Society, London, Special Publications 2015, v. 418, p. 209 219, doi 10.1144 SP418.3.

[END_OF_PAPER]

Received 3 February 2022 DOI 10.1111 bre.12674 Revised 15 April 2022 Accepted 20 April 2022 EAGE RESEARCH ARTICLE Tectono- stratigraphic evolution of the rift and post- rift systems in the Northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil Michael Strugale1,2 Joe Cartwright2 1 Petrobras S.A., Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 2 Department of Earth Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK Correspondence Michael Strugale, Petrobras S.A., Avenida Henrique Valadares, 28 - Centro, Rio de Janeiro, 20231- 030, Brazil. Email michael strugale petrobras. com.br Funding information Petrobras S.A., Brazil Abstract The Campos and Santos Basins have been a focus of subsurface studies since the discovery in 2006 of large accumulations of hydrocarbons in the Early Cretaceous rift and post- rift strata below Aptian evaporites. In this study, regional 2D seismic lines, a 3D seismic survey and well data were interpreted to reconstruct the tectono- stratigraphic evolution of the rift and post- rift stages in the northern sector of the Campos Basin. Detailed 3D seismic interpretation and geological modelling were used to subdivide the pre- salt sedimentary record. This revealed a diachronous strain distribution along the Guriri Fault System GFS , a roughly NE- SW striking fault- bounded horst that was a focus of rift- related deformation. The syn- rift succession is interpreted to be the product of two episodes of rifting RP1 and RP2 with contrasting fault activity patterns and lithostratigraphy. Volcaniclastics and coarse siliciclastics of RP1 were deposited under WNW- ESE transtension that formed discontinuous half- grabens followed by extensive erosion and tectonic inversion. Structurally controlled bioclastic rudstones and hybrid deposits characterize RP2 and were deposited in elongated half- grabens that delimit the GFS horst, which developed under an NW- SE extension. Deposition under increasingly less tectonically active transitional and post- rift stages dominated by thermal subsidence gradually led to the healing of the rift- related structural relief. Selective reactivation of rift faults testifies active tectonic inversion through compression from immediate post- rift throughout evaporite deposition. These interpretations are put into the context of recent geochronological data of onshore dyke emplacement and the new age constraints for the end of deposition of the pre- salt sequence. Therefore, we propose an earlier onset on rifting in the Campos Basin, at the Berriasian. KEYWORDS Campos Basin, early cretaceous, pre- salt, rift basin, sedimentation, tectonics 1 I N T RO DU CT ION Several studies of rifting of the Campos Basin in the context of the break- up of the South Atlantic Ocean during the Early Cretaceous have been made using a combination of regional 2D seismic, wellbore and potential field data Chang et al., 1992 Ponte Asmus, 1976 Stanton et al., 2019 . However, relatively few studies have been made using This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 2022 The Authors. Basin Research published by International Association of Sedimentologists and European Association of Geoscientists and Engineers and John Wiley Sons Ltd. Basin Research. 2022 34 1655 1687. wileyonlinelibrary.com journal bre 1655 1656 STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT EAGE high- resolution 3D seismic data at the scale of segments of basin- wide faults that constitute the rift system Alvarenga et al., 2021 Fetter, 2009 Olivito Souza, 2020 . Also, systematic structural mapping is only available for the Central sector of the Campos Basin Guardado et al., 1989a . Detailed petrographic and geochemical studies characterized the hydrothermal diagenesis in the rift transition to post- rift pre- salt carbonates in the North of the Campos Basin, with substantial impacts on reservoir quality Herlinger Jr. et al., 2017 Lima et al., 2020 Lima De Ros, 2019 . These publications assumed that hydrothermal fluids moved upwards along faults developed during the rift phase. Hydrothermal fluid flow via geological structures is a subject of broad relevance in subsurface resources geology e.g., Sharp et al., 2010 Walsh et al., 2018 and is controlled by several factors, from constitution and properties of the basement and sedimentary column Davies Smith Jr, 2006 Hollis et al., 2017 to the tectonic regime Sibson, 1992 Wiprut Zoback, 2000 . However, the spatial organization and temporal constraints of the rift faults thought to work as conduits for hydrothermal fluids in the pre- salt succession are poorly understood. Also, the age constraints of the end of pre- salt and onset of evaporite deposition have been recently challenged e.g., Pietzsch et al., 2020 Tedeschi et al., 2017 , demanding new investigations on the tectono- stratigraphic evolution of the pre- salt succession and onset age of rifting. To undertake the first step towards a more comprehensive understanding of tectono- stratigraphic evolution in the North of Campos Basin, it is essential to 1 constrain in detail the strain distribution related to rift faults in the three- dimensional space and their influence on deposition of syn- rift sequences and 2 describe the depositional architecture and the deformation in the post- rift sequences. Hence, the seismic architecture of syn- rift horizons and successions is interpreted and compared with some classic publications on tectono- stratigraphy of rift basins Gawthorpe Leeder, 2008 Lambiase, 1990 Martins- Neto Catuneanu, 2010 Morley, 2002 Prosser, 1993 . Also, studies on the Phanerozoic brittle reactivations and dyke emplacement in the adjacent onshore Precambrian basement Calegari et al., 2016 Santiago et al., 2020 and magmatism in the Campos Basin Almeida et al., 2013 Matos, 2021 are considered for a comprehensive understanding of the constraints of basin evolution. Such a comprehensive approach is necessary due to the poor geochronological control for the onset of rifting. The aims of this paper are to 1. Establish the geometry and kinematics of the rift- related fault framework and their later inversion 2. Describe the rift and post- rift tectono- stratigraphic framework and Highlights The tectono- stratigraphic framework of the presalt sequence is investigated. The NE- SW Guriri fault system was the locus of the rift related deformation. The structural and stratigraphic frameworks are the result of two phases of rifting. The onset of rifting occurred during the Berriasian. Inversion tectonics took place towards the end of the post- rift stage and during evaporite deposition. 3. Discuss our interpretations in the face of the new time constraints for the deposition of the pre- salt succession and evaporites. 2 GEOLOGICAL SETTING The Campos Basin is located in the Central Segment of the South Atlantic Ocean, which includes the contiguous Espi rito Santo and Santos basins East Brazil Moulin et al., 2010 . These basins originated from rifting of West Gondwana during the Early Cretaceous Chang et al., 1992 Rabinowitz LaBrecque, 1979 and evolved as an initially magma- poor, then magma- rich break- up stage Morgan et al., 2020 . The Central Segment exhibits some remarkable tectonic features as follows 1 southward widening of the basin margin and therefore a strong asymmetry of the necking zone and the continent ocean boundary, 2 the role of the Santos and Sa o Paulo Plateau as a kinematic buffer between the Central and the Austral segments Moulin et al., 2010 Araujo et al., 2022 and 3 anomalous rifting without the expected magnitude of rift- related subsidence and which led to the development of a long- lived extensive shallow carbonate platform and the subsequent salt deposits Karner Gambo a, 2007 Pietzsch et al., 2018 . The study area is located 70 km offshore, on the continental slope of the northern part of Campos Basin. The structural map of the shallow water domain of the Central Campos Basin shows major rift fault blocks bounded by alternating east- and west- dipping NNE striking normal faults, which are laterally continuous for long distances up to 200 km and have throws of as much as 2500 m Guardado et al., 1989a Figure 1 . The rift system in the central and northern Campos Basin has its foundations in two distinctive basement units the Oriental Terrane of the Ribeira Belt and the Cabo Frio Tectonic Domain CFTD Schmitt et al., 2008 STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT Stanton et al., 2019 . The former is constituted by low- P high- T Neoproterozoic para- and ortho- derived gneisses intruded by several magmatic bodies, with high- angle NE- SW fabrics generated under a right- lateral transpressional regime as a result of polyphase amalgamation from ca. 650 500 Ma. The CFTD mainly comprises Paleoproterozoic orthogneisses 2.0 1.94 Ga tectonically interleaved with medium to high T- P Neoproterozoic para- derived gneisses, both migmatized. The metamorphism and coeval ductile structures developed between 550 and 490 Ma due to a collisional event called the Bu zios Orogeny Schmitt et al., 2004 . The CFTD has a predominantly low- angle NW- SE to N- S structural grain, orthogonal to the adjacent Oriental Terrane Schmitt et al., 2004, 2016 . Two sets of fractures and dyke swarms striking NW to NNW transverse to the basement metamorphic grain in the onshore basement have their offshore projections close to the study area Almeida et al., 2021 the NNW- SSE Vito ria- Colatina lineament Chang et al., 1992 and the Piu ma Itaoca Castelo lineaments Lourenc o et al., 2016 Santiago et al., 2020 Figure 1 . In common, these structures demonstrate a polyphase evolution, with alkaline dykes being emplaced during the Cambrian, and tholeiitic dykes in the Early Cretaceous age see age compilation in Pessano et al., 2021 . The dykes are interpreted as the result of the orogenic collapse of the EAGE 1657 Arac uai Belt during the Cambrian and the opening of the South Atlantic Ocean during Early Cretaceus respectively. Therefore, they show recurrent episodes of brittle deformation of which precise timing and kinematic relations remain unclear Calegari et al., 2016 Lourenc o et al., 2016 Santiago et al., 2020 . A relative tectonically quiescent period of more than 300 Myr followed the Bu zios Orogeny. From the Late Jurassic to Early Cretaceous, prior to the South Atlantic Ocean opening, several magmatic events were recorded in the region of Western Gondwana in which the Campos Basin formed. In the present- day onshore basement domain, early Cretaceous dykes along the Vito ria- Colatina lineament yield Ar Ar ages ranging 136 128 Ma and were emplaced under slightly dextral oblique extension Almeida et al., 2013 . The Castelo dyke swarm reveals a U Pb Concordia age of 141 1.9 Ma Santiago et al., 2020 . Both dyke swarms have geochemical signatures and ages similar to other Upper Jurassic Lower Cretaceous dyke swarms of the Brazilian coast Almeida et al., 2013 and to the basalt floods of the Parana - Etendeka Large Igneous Province LIP , of which ages ranges from 135 to 131 Ma Matos, 2021 and references therein . The rift system formed during the onset of the Campos Basin in Central South Atlantic c.f. Moulin et al., 2010 occurred under an E- W main extension direction, which varies from orthogonal to oblique to the present- day coastal line, F I G U R E 1 Location of the study area 3D seismic survey and the 2D semi- regional dip seismic section. The geology of the onshore basement is represented as a simplified geological map modified from Trouw et al., 2013 and Martins et al., 2021 , which also shows the Early Cretaceous dyke swarms i.e., 1 Vito ria- Colatina lineament, 2 Castelo and 3 Serra Do Mar, c.f. Almeida et al., 2021 . CFTD, Cabo Frio tectonic domain c.f. Schmitt et al., 2004 . The main rift faults of the Central Campos Basin are also shown adapted from Guardado et al., 1989a 1658 EAGE resulting in a rift system in the northern Campos Basin. The extension became increasingly oblique southwards and reached its maximum in the ultra- wide rifted margin of the Santos Basin Araujo et al., 2022 . During the early rift phase, magmatism within the Campos Basin was characterized by mafic dyke injection onshore and extrusion of continental flood basalts of the Cabiu nas Formation from the Berriasian to Barremian Mizusaki et al., 1992 Santiago et al., 2020 . The Campos Basin sedimentary record is traditionally divided into three tectono- stratigraphic supersequences rift, post- rift and drift Cainelli Mohriak, 1999 Winter et al., 2007 . The rift and post- rift supersequences span STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT from Hauterivian to Aptian and represent the pre- salt succession. It begins with a volcaniclastic unit that represents the Cabiu nas Formation Figure 2 . Most relevant data from this unit came from shallow water drilling in the Central sector of the Campos Basin Mizusaki et al., 1992 . These authors demonstrated that Cabiu nas Formation tholeiitic basalts have similar bulk- rock chemistry and ages K Ar ranging 134 122 Ma slightly younger than basalts of the Parana Etendeka LIP 135 131 Ma . However, Mizusaki et al. 1992 speculate that such younger ages found in the Cabiu nas Formation could be related to K2O addition during alteration, affecting the K Ar ages. F I G U R E 2 Compilation of the stratigraphic framework of the Campos Basin not to scale . Ages and lithostratigraphy according to Winter et al. 2007 1 . Ages according to Pietzsch et al., 2020 Sanjine s et al., 2022 Tedeschi et al., 2017, 2019 2 , where 128 ma is the age for the top of the Coqueiros formation. Horiz. mapped horizons in this work tSalt Top salt, SBU Salt Base Unconformity, IPRU Internal Post- Rift Unconformity, PRU Post- Rift Unconformity, tRift Top Rift, tSRII Top Syn- Rift II, tI A top Itabapoana plus Atafona formations, tBas top Basement. T.S. tectonic stages are relative to the whole Campos Basin Winter et al., 2007 3 and to the deepwater domain of the North Campos Basin Olivito Souza, 2020 4 . Lithologies were based on Winter et al. 2007 , Lima and De Ros 2019 and Olivito and Souza 2020 . The 134 ma value is the oldest age obtained in the basalts of the Cabiu nas formation Mizusaki et al., 1992 STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT The Lagoa Feia Group is stratigraphically above the Cabiu nas Formation and extends to the top of the evaporites of the Retiro Formation, embracing both rift and post- rift stages Figure 2 . It comprises five formations separated by regional and local unconformities, thus representing the primary seismic- stratigraphic markers Winter et al., 2007 Figure 2 . The study area is located in the outer distal tectonic- sedimentary domains of the rift section of the Lagoa Feia Group, where isolated grabens were initially filled with siliciclastics to mixed carbonate deposits that evolved to isolated carbonate platforms built over structural highs, continuously in lacustrine conditions Dias et al., 1988 Muniz Bosence, 2018 . The rift stage continued with the deposition of coarse siliciclastics to shales under strong structural control, formally described as the Itabapoana and Atafona Formations, respectively. Towards the end of the rift stage, bioclastic rudstones and hybrid laminites represent the Coqueiros Formation Winter et al., 2007 . Recently, its facies associations were reinterpreted in a 3D context and the lower section of the Coqueiros formations was placed in the rift stage, while the upper section was classified as a transition rift stage Olivito Souza, 2020 . During the post- rift phase, the onset of thermal subsidence led to the environment of deep lakes with internal topographic highs being replaced by an extensive shallow, highly alkaline evaporative lacustrine system in which the Macabu Formation was deposited Chang et al., 1992 Pietzsch et al., 2018 . This shallow lake was in turn replaced by a highly evaporative shallow marine setting, leading to the deposition of up to 2000 m of evaporites of the Retiro Formation. Traditionally, the age of evaporites is ca. 113 Ma, at the top of Aptian Winter et al., 2007 Figure 2 . From the Albian, the deposition of the drift supersequence triggered remarkable thin- skinned gravitational gliding of salt and related salt compression in the outer regions of the Campos Basin Davison, 2007 Szatmari et al., 2021 . 2.1 Revised age dating of the pre- salt sequence The Lagoa Feia Group ranges in age from the Barremian to the Late Aptian Bertani Carozzi, 1985a, 1985b Thompson et al., 2015 Winter et al., 2007 . Because of the endemic character of its fauna, it is challenging to make correlations with basins outside the Central Segment of the South Atlantic. Therefore, the depositional age of the pre- salt sequence had been constrained by radiometric data of underlying basalts of the Cabiu nas Formation Mizusaki et al., 1992 and at its top by the age of the EAGE 1659 onset of evaporite deposition of the Retiro Formation ca. 115 Ma Szatmari et al., 2021 . However, the assumption of a late Aptian age for the end of deposition of the Macabu Formation and the onset of salt deposition has recently been challenged by several authors Lima et al., 2018 Pietzsch et al., 2020 Tedeschi et al., 2017, 2019 Figure 2 . New high- resolution carbon isotope 13C profiles from shallow- and deepwater drillings in the Eastern Brazilian Margin Sergipe- Alagoas, Campos and Santos Basins were correlated with well- calibrated Tethyan sections. These new correlations constrain the end of major evaporite deposition in the South Atlantic to the early Aptian Oceanic Anoxic Event OAE 1a interval 124 125 Ma , thus the age of PRU as being 128 Ma Tedeschi et al., 2019 . Also, an increase in atmospheric CO2, predating the OAE 1a event, resulted in a change in the mode of the carbonate factory, recorded in the last tens of metres of the Barra Velha Formation in the Santos Basin equivalent to the Macabu Formation in the Campos Basin . Hence, it puts further time constraints on the age of deposition of the top of the pre- salt sequence as not younger than Barremian Pietzsch et al., 2020 . Additional evidence came from new biostratigraphic records from wells drilled in the deepwater portion of the Campos Basin, where Aptian sections of up to 800 m thick occur above the salt Lima et al., 2018 Sanjine s et al., 2022 . However, the new constraints for the age of salt thereof have been challenged by a review paper Szatmari et al., 2021 . Their results kept the age of salt deposition within the usual time frame i.e., 116 110 Ma , based on 39 Ar 40Ar ages from evaporites in the Sergipe- Alagoas basin and a pre- salt volcano in the southern Santos Basin. The main argument of these authors is that the Tethyan section was located in a different realm than the Brazilian margin during the Early Cretaceous, thus making the correlation problematic. 3 METHODS This study is based on commercial 2D PSTM and 3D PSDM seismic surveys and well data. Eight 2D semi- regional, dip- oriented deep seismic lines recorded from 8 to 12 s TWT provided control of the crustal structure and contextualized the 3D survey. This 3D survey, corresponding to the study area of this work, is a 3D streamer Pre- Stack Depth Migration PSDM seismic data consisting of a merge of two seismic surveys see Strugale et al., 2021 for details . Well- logs and geological markers from 34 exploration and production wells named W01 W34 were calibrated with the horizon interpretation in the 3D survey. Sidewall cores from the few wells used to calibrate the 1660 STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT EAGE rift phase sedimentary units were invaluable in correlating seismic markers with the regional lithostratigraphic framework. Six seismic horizons BSU Base- Salt Unconformity, IPRU Internal Post- Rift Unconformity, PRU Post- Rift Unconformity, tRift Top Rift, tI A Top Itabapoana plus Atafona Formations and tBas Top Basement that crudely correspond to the formal lithostratigraphic units described in Winter et al. 2007 were extensively mapped throughout the 3D survey and represent unconformities or their correlative surfaces in the depocentres Figure 2 . They subdivide the pre- salt sequence into six seismic tectono- stratigraphic sequences TSSs comprising the syn- rift SRI, SRII, SRIII , rift transition RTR and post- rift PRI, PRII tectonic stages. Local surfaces were also mapped between these horizons to identify changes in the seismic architecture. Faults, fold axes and erosional scarps were also mapped throughout. The interpreted 3D framework of horizons and faults was converted to a 3D geological model using the Structural Model workflow in PetrelTM, based on a 50 50 m mesh resolution. Depth, dip and dip direction attributes were extracted from every fault node to construct cross- plots and equal area lower- hemisphere stereographic diagrams stereograms . True Vertical Thickness TVT isopach maps were generated from the model to evaluate thickness variations and evaluate fault- controlled accommodation. Edge effects due to lack of correlation at the margins of the 3D survey were considered during interpretation. Faults were divided into subpopulations grouped by strike direction and structural domains Fossen R rnes, 1996 . Faults were also geographically grouped to represent genetically related structures and hence fault branches high strain and intra- fault zone domains low strain . The 3D model was used to perform fault length versus displacement L D analyses and automatic extraction of horizontal separation heave for each modelled horizon. 3D kinematic analysis of more prominent basement faults in rift settings has generally been applied where hanging wall depocentres are thick typically 2 km , and a large number of syn- rift reflectors occurs e.g., Collanega et al., 2019 Duffy et al., 2015 Lenhart et al., 2019 . Ideally, mapped horizons must not represent erosive or highly condensed non- depositional events since comparing depositional thickness across the faults is critical for understanding the evolving fault activity. However, underfilled half- grabens are challenging to assess since they often exhibit erosion of the footwall crest McLeod et al., 2000 . Also, prominent footwall highs, local and regional unconformities often merge into a few tuned reflectors making correlation challenging. In the study area, fault scarps, folds, syn- kinematic and prograding wedges and local structural complexities pose further challenges when using these techniques. Taking account of these limitations, we opted for a more geometrical approach, where the hanging wall and footwall cut- offs of each seismic horizon and their respective seismic- depositional sequence were displayed in the map view, resulting in coloured polygons representing the heave for each stratigraphic unit Figure 3a . Therefore, the heaves were analysed for either a single or a combination of horizons, resulting in tectono- stratigraphic maps on which the gross cumulative strain and spatio- temporal strain variations can be analysed Figure 3b . However, this indeed takes no account of the possibility of underfilling in particular intervals, despite fault scarps occurring only in a handful of fault segments. Hence, for complex faults with significant across- fault correlation uncertainties, the cut- off lines were modified by additional seismic observation, like stratal terminations onlap, erosional truncation and downlap , divergent syn- kinematic reflector and thickness variations, providing better time constraints of the fault activity see faults d and e in Figure 3a . 4 4.1 RESULTS Structural framework The integration of 2D and 3D seismic structural interpretations from this study were correlated with existing structural maps of the Central Campos Basin Guardado et al., 1989a, 1989b , to extend the documented structural framework to the northern limit of the basin. In the northern Campos Basin, normal faults striking crudely NNE- SSW, dip both east and west and constitute a similar rift- related fault framework to that mapped towards the south. Therefore, major structural features i.e., the Sa o Joa o da Barra and Corvina- Parati Lows and the Badejo high extend northwards into the study area Figure 4a . From a cross- section perspective, the pre- salt depocentres are younger towards the offshore, indicating the progressive rejuvenation of the rifting towards the spreading axis Figure 4b . Another notable feature is the shallowing of the seismic Moho below the present- day shelf break where there are thicker rift deposits. This is interpreted as an early stage upper- crustal boudin of an originally thicker upper crust c.f. Clerc et al., 2018 . Also notable is the inverse correlation between the upper crust and the pre- salt sedimentary thicknesses Figure 4b . Over 170 normal faults were mapped within the 3D survey. The strike of faults has an average value of N40 with a significant population at N- S Figure 5a . Dip directions are evenly distributed to E and W, although the faults with major displacements up to 1250 m are antithetic to STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT EAGE 1661 F I G U R E 3 a Explanatory cartoon using six randomly picked faults Fa to Ff to explain the production of the tectono- stratigraphic maps. Seismic profiles across the structures are also shown to present the fault horizon relationships and across- fault thickness variations. HW FW cut- off lines were not entirely followed in faults Fd and Fe . Fd is likely to represent more than one fault segment. In this figure, stratal terminations and dip indicators are merely illustrative. Coloured polygons represent the TSSs see text for description . b Strain vs time distribution map according to the methodology shown in a for a selected region of the studied area 1662 EAGE STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT F I G U R E 4 a Semi- regional fault framework at top basement level, mapped from 2D seismic lines red dotted lines and 3D seismic survey red polygon . The location map is based on Figure 1. The framework is correlated with the fault interpretation of Guardado et al. 1989a . The Vito ria- Colatina lineament is projected from the onshore. b Interpreted semi- regional two- way time 2D seismic line showing the shallow- to deepwater transition. The crustal domains of the Campos rifted margin c.f. Stanton et al., 2019 are shown, where NZ is the necking zone and HED is a distal highly- extended domain. The continental oceanic crustal boundary is ca. 75 km to the east of the section limit. Note the shallowing Moho and the significant thickness of the pre- salt section in the shallow water. As depicted in the study area, the Guriri fault zone is discussed in this work. For the uninterpreted seismic section, see Figure A1 STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT the regional basin dip. The dip angle tends to increase towards the top of the pre- salt sequence Figure A2b . Fault distribution and patterns in map view were used to subdivide the area into three major structural domains. These correspond to a central, roughly NE- SW- oriented horst, flanked by two domains that are structurally lower at the basement level Figure 5a . This horst is 10 km wide and is delimited by the major faults that are the strain loci of the area Figure 4a . The central horst is here named Guriri Fault System GFS . To the west of GFS, the structural low is denominated the Inner Guriri Low and to the east is the Outer Guriri Low. These three main structural domains exhibit internal deformation by subsidiary faulting, denoting internal structural highs and lows Figure 5b . The fault networks that focused the strain, thus acting to delimit the margins of the GFS are subdivided into three fault branches GFSN, GFSE and GFSS Figure 5a . The GFSN and GFSE have fault segments dipping in a single direction west and east respectively , while the GFSS exhibits structures dipping in both directions. Elsewhere, a footwall complex FWC represents the major positive structural element, flanked to the SSW by a depocentre Low C . Within the Inner Guriri Low, two internal depocentres are observed A and B , and the Outer Guriri Low has two internal lows Low D and Low E and one internal high Well 33 High W33H . L Dmax analysis demonstrates that GFS branches focused the strain Figure A3 , and stereographic diagrams show that faults within the GFS branches have the main strike direction NE- SW that differs from the average direction of the faults elsewhere NNE- SSW Figure A4 . The structural contours of BSU base salt and the isopach map for the pre- salt sequence are shown in Figure 5c,d respectively. Interestingly, the latter barely records the rift- related structural framework of Figure 5a, attesting to the deposition of a significant succession i.e., the post- rift units in a different tectonic setting. The GFSN hosts the major faults in the 3D survey area, with 1000 m maximum displacements. The fault pattern in the map view is highly segmented with curvilinear fault traces whose strikes range between N- S and NE- SW, and dip systematically to NW. Also, dip angles decrease northwards along the strike, from 45 up to 25 , and splay into two segments towards the north Figure 5a,b . The GFSN has the Low A as the hanging wall block, hosting the thickest depocentre in the area with up to 2.6 km of pre- salt sediments. Low A consists of three subsidiary hanging wall depocentres that are adjacent to zones of maximum displacement of the main segments of the fault zone c.f. McLeod et al., 2000 . The footwall of the GFSN i.e., FWC is internally faulted by NNE- SSW striking, oblique to GFSN and GFSE, mostly E- dipping faults with displacements 250 m Figure 5b . EAGE 1663 The GFSE is the eastward limit of the GFS and constitutes an array of quasi- parallel fault segments that are either hard- breached relays or soft- linked Figure 5b . Segments dip systematically to the E with angles ranging from 45 to 70 and maximum displacements of up to 600 m. To the east, the Outer GFS Low has subsidiary depocentres in the hanging wall of the major segments of GFSE Lows D and E and an internal high W33H , which has the thinnest pre- salt of the 3D survey Figure 5d . Faults within Outer GFS Low have maximum displacements ranging from 200 to 400 m and are organized as a conjugate set whose intersection branch line is N25 oriented. The GFSS is an apparent direct south- westward continuation of the GFSN branch but has a contrasting polarity of its main constituent faults, dipping predominantly SE. The east- dipping faults strike N- S to NNE and represent the structures with the largest maximum displacement values, of up to 500 m, that in turn delimit the half- graben of Low C Figure 5a,b . During the course of the rifting, new west- dipping NE- SW striking faults nucleated westwards in an apparent southern extension of the GFSN branch. We interpret a roughly NW- SE striking transverse structure to the GFS as an accommodation zone c.f. Morley et al., 1990 Figure 5a . This interpretation is based on two main lines of evidence. Firstly, an alignment of a number of breached relays and fault tips Figure 5a,b , and secondly, a demarcation in changes in thickness distribution of the pre- salt tectono- stratigraphic units. 4.2 Seismic- stratigraphic framework The primary hierarchy of the subdivision of the pre- salt sequence in the study area is two tectono- stratigraphic supersequences syn- rift SR and post- rift PR , separated by a rift transition RTR sequence. The terminology and interpretational diagnostics leading to this subdivision into supersequences were adapted from previous regional and local scales works Cainelli Mohriak, 1999 Olivito Souza, 2020, respectively . In addition, internal unconformities and their correlative conformities allowed the subdivision of the supersequences into units with their own internal organization and termination patterns of seismic reflectors, lithological content and thickness distribution. They represent units that are lower in the stratigraphic hierarchy and therefore denominated as seismic tectono- stratigraphic sequences TSS Figure 6 . Six TSSs were recognized three representing the syn- rift supersequence syn- rift I, II and III SRI, SRII and SRIII , one is equivalent to the rift transition RTR , 1664 EAGE STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT F I G U R E 5 a Scheme of the major NE- SW trending structural domains showing the GFS grey , their high strain branches yellow and the adjacent structural lows inner and outer GFS lows . Simplified traces of the major fault segments within the GFS branches black and a stereographic diagram of all the mapped faults are also shown. b Top basement tBas structural map showing the local structural lows A E , their internal subdivisions A1 3 and highs FWC, W33H . Dotted lines are the external boundaries of the GFS branches as shown in a . c Base salt bSalt structural map. d Thickness map of the pre- salt sequence STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT and two represent the post- rift supersequence post- rift I PRI and post- rift II PRII . The syn- rift TSSs show the diachronous distribution of divergent seismic reflectors wedges against faults and particular terminations of seismic reflectors onlaps and truncations against the delimiting horizons tI A, tSRII , justifying this subdivision. Also, the horizon between PRI and PRII sequences IPRU shows truncations and contrasting gamma- ray signatures between these TSSs Herlinger Jr. et al., 2017 . The gross stratigraphy is well calibrated by well markers and sidewall cores. The following interpretations are based on geological cross- sections and thickness maps Figures 6 and 7 respectively that evidence the spatio- temporal changes in the distribution and internal organization of each of the TSSs. To illustrate the main lithotypes, sidewall cores from selected wells are displayed in Figure A5. 4.2.1 The syn- rift supersequence Syn- rift I TSS SRI This unit is delimited at its base by a major unconformity tBas that separates the Precambrian basement from the sedimentary section. The top surface is also unconformable tI A , occurring as an erosive truncation in the structural highs and either as correlative conformity or onlapped surface in the depocentres Figure 6a,c . In Low C, this unit defines classical divergent wedge geometry that is diagnostic of syn- depositional faulting Figure 6c . Elsewhere, SRI commonly occurs as parallel layered internal reflectors, including in the hanging wall of some major GFSN faults Figure 6a . Parallel configurations are commonly inferred as being pre- rift in a rift context, but this is not considered likely here. Instead, the parallelism is interpreted as low strain syn- rift, where distributed faulting provides the accommodation space, rather than a single major fault leading to pronounced fault block rotation and divergent geometry. The SRI isopach map shows three NNE- SSE- trending depocentres in the centre of the 3D survey of which Low C is the westernmost and thickest, with 900 m of sediments Figures 6c and 7a . Interestingly, the map distribution of the SRI thickness shows little correlation with the GFS branches compare with Figure 5a . Five wells penetrated to the tBas horizon W01, 2, 4, 5, 34 . The recognition and seismic interpretation of the tBas horizon in the study area is not straightforward and was investigated in detail by Strugale et al. 2021 . Three wells found SRI basalts that sit on top of the basement when it is present W04, 33, 34 . Wells 33 and 34 drilled EAGE 1665 coarse siliciclastics over basalts, while in W04 bioclastic rudstones of the syn- rift III SRIII sequence overly SRI basalts. Wells W12, 14 and 25 only reached the top of the SRI and drilled medium to coarse siliciclastics with high feldspar content. SRI is equivalent to three lithostratigraphic units, the Cabiu nas, Itabapoana and Atafona Formations Figure 2 . The basalt thicknesses in the wells are below the vertical seismic resolution 90 m and, therefore, the top of the Cabiu nas Formation was not mapped. Also, the seismic signal of SRI and available well data made any differentiation between the Itabapoana and Atafona Formations impossible. Syn- rift II TSS SRII The syn- rift II SRII sequence is delimitated at its base by the tI A unconformity and at its top by the tSRII horizon. SRII internal reflectors are parallel or onlap onto the tI A near the active divergent wedges Figure 6a,b , except for a localized truncation over the Low A1 Figure 6d . The upper section of SRII is often conformable to tSRII in dip sections Figure 6b . However, the strike cross- section shows that tSRII pinches out and is truncated towards the south Figure 6d and against the inverted Low C Figure 6f . Deposition of SRII was coeval with substantial footwall erosion in the GFSN, thus constituting a fault scarp that was onlapped during SRIII Figure 6a . The main characteristic of the thickness distribution of SRII is its occurrence as a sub- basin Low A within the Inner GFS Low in the hanging wall of the GFSN Figure 7b . SRII is absent by non- deposition or erosion elsewhere. Up to 1 km of sediments accumulate in this sub- basin, and they show remarkable divergent wedges within Low A2 Figure 6a , where the GFSN has its maximum displacement. Within Low 2, a strike cross- section shows that the upper SRII thickens then onlaps onto the tI A horizon towards Low A1 Figure 6d . Elsewhere, parallel to tSRII, internal seismic reflectors are predominant Figure 6a,b,d . There is no well calibration for the SRII therefore, its lithology will be interpreted in the context of the following SRIII TSS. The limited areal occurrence of SRII implies that the tI A and tSRII horizons merge elsewhere as tSRII, consequently representing a significant gap in the sedimentary record Figure 6c,e,f . However, it is not clear if the absence of SRII is the consequence of non- deposition, pre- SRIII erosion or both. Syn- rift III TSS SRIII The syn- rift III SRIII sequence is bounded at its base by both tI A and tSRII surfaces and at its top by the tRift horizon. The tRift is widely distributed in the 3D survey as a mostly conformable surface and rarely shows evidence of erosion e.g., Figure 6d . The base of SRIII onlaps the 1666 EAGE STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT F I G U R E 6 Sets of dip a c and strike d f seismic- geological cross- sections showing selected stratigraphic and structural features. A simplified stratigraphic key is also shown int. S., internal surface T.S, Tectonic stage of Olivito and Souza 2020 TSS, Tectono- stratigraphic sequences UNC., unconformities . White arrows indicate onlap, toplap, truncation and downlap terminations STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT EAGE 1667 F I G U R E 7 Thickness maps of each tectono- stratigraphic sequence TSS . External boundaries of the branches of the GFS are shown dotted lines . Structural domains from Figure 5a are overlaid in the map in b . Relevant depocentres for each sequence, according to Figure 5b, are shown. Mounds are outlined on the maps of RTR, PRI and PRII. Wells that drilled tBas, tI A and tRift horizons are shown respectively. The wells that perforated the RTR except W08 and PR are not shown for clarity tSRII, onto internal transverse faults in the hanging wall of GFSN Figure 6a,d and over the tI A in Low C Figure 6f . SRIII internal reflectors parallel to the base are rare and can be observed locally in strike sections Figure 6d . The SRIII package resembles the typical pattern of residual relief filling, progressively onlapping onto fault scarps and covering structural highs Figure 6 . Therefore, seismic reflectors are often parallel to the top. Syn- tectonic thickening also occurs related to selected segments of the GFSN Figure 6b and, more widely, along the GFSE and GFSS branches Figure 7c . Elsewhere, a parallel internal organization is predominant. The thickness distribution of SRIII follows the main Guriri Fault System GFS structural compartments. The 1668 STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT EAGE isopach map shows the configuration of thicker depocentres on both sides of the GFS horst, ranging from 400 m thick in the outer and up to 800 m thick in the Inner GFS Low. Interestingly, thicker deposits of SRIII in the Outer GFS Low occur near the GFS East GFSE branch, while it thins considerably elsewhere Figure 7c . Along the strike of the GFS North GFSN , thicker depocentres of SRI and SRII are located in the northern and central sectors of the GFSN branch, respectively, while SRIII thickens southwards, following newly nucleated NE- SW striking faults west of GFS South GFSS branch Figures 6d and 7c . It demonstrates the overall southward strain migration along the strike of the GFSN and subsequently, GFSS, thus the overprinting of NE- SW segments over SRI N- S faults, that bounds Low C. Consequently, Low B was established and therefore configuring the horst geometry of the GFS Figures 6c,f and 7c . Another notable feature is the post- SRII erosion nucleation of subsidiary faults towards the footwall of the GFSN, which are parallel in the strike but steeper compared to the earlier segments of the GFSN. The timing of formation is endorsed by the thickening of SRIII and rift transition RTR in the hanging wall block Figure 6a,b . Major rift faults often exhibit erosion in the footwall that Is usually related to footwall uplift and the formation of new faults as the consequence of the rotation of the faulted block, in a process known as footwall degradation, where faulting occurs either towards the hanging or the footwall blocks Hesthammer Fossen, 1999 Morley et al., 2007 . Wellbore calibration of SRIII is given by the nine penetrations see Section 4.2.1.1 and W17, Figure 7c . Bioclastic rudstone coquinas is the most common lithotype in the structural highs, while low energy hybrid siltstones occur in depocentres Olivito Souza, 2020 . The SRIII sequence is therefore correlated to the Coq A unit, the basal unit of the Coqueiros Formation according to those authors. From the amplitude of the constituent reflectors and similar isopach distribution of SRII seismic tectono- sedimentary sequence TSS in the Inner GFS Low compared to the SRIII TSS, it is interpreted that both sequences are part of a single phase of rifting and probably share the lithological content. The GFSN branch exerts a fundamental role in controlling the creation of depositional space for both units Figure 6a . The section equivalent to SRII has been included in the combined Itabapoana and Cabiu nas Formations, while SRIII represents the base of the Coqueiros Formation Olivito Souza, 2020 . Because of the similarities thereof, SRII plus SRIII are here interpreted as belonging to the basal unit of the Coqueiros Formation and record syn- rift deposits Figure 6b . GFSN activity prevails during the SRII and SRIII deposition and contrasts significantly with the SRI structure Figure 7a c . In addition, fault scarp formation during SRII denotes an active sediment- starved graben, which is typical in the early stages of rift filling, followed by generalized fill of the structural relief during SRIII e.g., Prosser, 1993 Figure 6a . 4.2.2 The rift transition sequence The rift transition RTR TSS is delimited by tRift at the base and PRU post- rift unconformity at the top. The tRift is widely recognized as a conformable surface that is only occasionally onlapped by internal reflectors of RTR. The PRU has an erosive character towards the NE region of the survey that leads to top truncation and eventually the complete absence of the RTR in the easternmost portions of the study area Figure 7d . Otherwise, PRU is also a conformable surface e.g., Figure 6d . Internally, the organization of the seismic reflectors are predominantly parallel except when submitted to erosion related to PRU, where the modest thickness compromised the resolution of the seismic signal. However, the proximal hanging wall block of the southern sector of GFSN shows a quite distinct pair of mound- shaped reflectors Figure 7d . They have a circular to NE- trending ellipsoidal planform, with 3 5 km average length and exhibit downlapping terminations in the base and are onlapped by the post- rift units Figure 6e . The mounds are not contemporaneous because the southern mound downlaps in the internal seismic reflector equivalent to the top of the northern mound internal surface IRTR1 Figure 6e . However, a dip section shows that the mounds are comprised of wedges that prograde from the footwall complex onto the hanging wall of the GFSN Figure 6b . This figure also shows that the depositional space occupied by the prograding wedge was created by newly formed NNE- SSW to NE- SW striking faults towards the footwall of the fault zone. These structures are amongst the few that were active during the RTR and are probably related to the ongoing footwall degradation observed during the SRIII. Finally, the geometry of RTR mounds is similar to the clinoforms observed in deposits in Santos Basin of similar age, except for the absence of syn- depositional tectonics Barnett et al., 2021 . The isopach map of the RTR shows an overall thickening to the SW and absence of erosion in the eastern region as major features Figure 7d . It also shows the imprint of the main structural compartments of Figure 5a, although the W33H internal high has a thinner RTR than the GFS horst. The two mounds are quite distinctive, hosting the thicker RTR with over 700 m. Tilting to the SW along the GFS exerts the primary control on the first- order thickness variations, so the RTR thickens towards the SW despite the GFS and their counterpart structural lows. The southward stepping of the mounds STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT and erosion towards the NE supports the interpretation of such widespread atilting. Several wells 34 reached or drilled through the RTR sequence, mainly in the footwall complex. The RTR is interpreted as equivalent to the upper section of the Coqueiros Formation, described by Olivito and Souza 2020 as a ramp- margin shallowing- up sequence in modest water depths. These authors subdivided the upper section of the Coqueiros Formation into four sub- units Coq B E and proposed their inclusion as a transition rift stage. The mounds are interpreted as berm and shoreface facies associations. The relatively homogeneous isopach distribution and depositional style could be interpreted as resembling a post- rift architecture. However, the role of syn- depositional faulting remains significant on both sides of the GFS horst Figures 6b and 7d . Therefore, the RTR is better explained as a transition sequence between clear syn- rift sequences SRII and SRIII and clear post- rift sequences PRI and PRII . 4.2.3 The post- rift supersequence The post- rift tectono- stratigraphic sequence has aggradational parallel to mound- shaped seismic facies and is characterized by a lack of any significant syn- depositional fault activity. It corresponds to the Macabu Formation that extends throughout the Campos and Santos basin, where it is named Barra Velha Formation, both deposited in an extensive sag- like basin geometry Pietzsch et al., 2018 . The Macabu Formation comprises shallowing- up cyclothems of mud- grade laminated carbonates, mm- diameter spherulitic carbonates and calcite shrub- like crusts, all deposited in a highly alkaline evaporative lake Lima De Ros, 2019 Wright Barnett, 2015 . Using well data logs and cores as a proxy for depositional facies, clay content, and therefore water depth, the overall stacking pattern is a deepening post- rift I PRI tectono- stratigraphic sequence TSS followed by a shallowing- up post- rift II PRII TSS sequence Herlinger Jr. et al., 2017 Muniz Bosence, 2015 the IPRU Internal Post- Rift unconformity separates the two TSSs and, according to Herlinger Jr. et al. 2017 , is equivalent to a third- order sequence boundary. Post- rift I PRI TSS The PRI TSS is delimited at the base by the PRU unconformity and the top by the IPRU internal post- rift unconformity . The PRU is related to extensive pre- PRI erosion in the NE region of the study area, and similar to in the rift transition RTR , the erosive nature of the PRU and IPRU increase towards the NE. Consequently, EAGE 1669 PRI discretely onlaps onto the PRU and is truncated by IPRU erosion towards the east Figure 6c e . Otherwise, these surfaces occur as correlative conformities see the southern sector of Section 6d . The PRI filling pattern is dominantly aggradational and therefore shows a parallel internal organization of the seismic reflectors. A few isolated build- ups occur in the crest of the GFSN Figure 7e with no clear relation with active faulting, which differs from RTR mounds. Thickness distribution has two major domains separated by transverse NNW- SSE trace across the centre of the 3D survey Figure 7e , equivalent in position to the accommodation zone shown in Figure 5a. To the east, the thickness is typically around 100 m and barely reaches 300 m in the hanging walls of the GFS branches. To the west, the average thickness is around 300 m and reaches up to 650 m in the westernmost region. Notice that the main compartments and the sub- compartments of the rift stage are barely recognizable in the isopach map. When observed, thickening in the hanging walls of Guriri Fault System GFS branches is probably related to inherited structural relief from RTR, resulting in contrasting accommodation space across the faults. Post- rift II PRII TSS The uppermost unit of the pre- salt sequence is delimited at the base by the IPRU and at the top by the base- salt unconformity BSU Figure 6 . The PRII internal reflectors are usually parallel to the IPRU, except when it is downlaped by mounds Figure 6a . The BSU is quite distinctive and reveals significant erosion in the hinge of fault- propagation folds and footwall blocks Figure 6b,c,e and within the Inner GFS Low Figure 6d . The internal reflectors of PRII are usually parallel, but often onlapping onto the IPRU as tilting to SW remains active just after the PRI, and are commonly truncated at the top by the BSU. Internal surfaces IPRII1- 3 are particularly abundant in the Inner GFS Low and suggest a cut- and- fill geometry Figure 6d,e,f . Mounded shape packages occur extensively over the upward projection of the GFSN branch and are apical to its faults related to footwall degradation Figures 6a and 7f . Therefore, these mounds are symmetrical and prograde onto both footwalls and hanging walls of the fault segment that anchors them. Apart from differences in terms of average and maximum values, the thickness distribution is similar to that of the PRI, i.e. it is divided into two major domains separated by an NNW- SSE accommodation zone and does not follow the major structural domains of the rift stage. The main difference between PRI and PRII thicknesses is the lack of broad post- depositional erosion towards the east in the latter. The relatively homogeneous thickness of the PRII shows an increasingly sag depositional geometry in the form of 1670 wider depocentres compared to syn- rift and RTR sequences, preceding evaporite deposition Figure 4 . However, the present- day configuration of the bSalt, far from being horizontal and undisturbed Figure 5c , points towards significant post- salt tectonism affecting the pre- salt sequence. 4.3 STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT EAGE Tectono- stratigraphic evolution Having the gross structural and stratigraphic framework established, it is integrated into the tectono- stratigraphic maps Figure 3 for each of the seismic tectono- stratigraphic sequences TSSs Figure 8 . These maps focused on an area that includes the Guriri Fault System GFS and the near adjacent Inner and Outer GFS Lows. Fault displacement analysis and fold descriptions provided further input for the kinematic analysis that underpins this summary of the tectono- stratigraphic evolution. The tectono- stratigraphic maps show that the rift- related subsidence was highly diachronous along the NE- SW striking GFS Figure 8 . They also show that the final horst geometry of the GFS had only developed towards the end of rifting. Thickness maps and the alignment of fault tips and changes in the strike of rift faults suggest the underlying and sometimes cryptic influence of NW- SE transverse structures Figures 3b and 5b,d . A comparison of the three TSSs of the syn- rift stage reveals similarities between the maps of SRII and SRIII that make them distinct from SRI. Amongst the differences, we note the lithological contrast volcanics plus coarse siliciclastics of SRI to carbonates of SRII plus SRIII TSSs Figure 2 and, mostly, the contrasting structural pattern and therefore depocentre distribution Figure 7a c . Also, the significant time gap related to the tSRII unconformity since it represents the merge of two unconformable surfaces tI A and tSRII in most areas should be considered. Finally, the inversion of the most significant depocentre of SRI i.e., Low C clear predates the SRII plus SRIII deposition Figure 6c,f . It is important here to distinguish between the inversion that predates the SRII plus SRIII, related to stress redistribution during the rift- related extension and best exemplified in the Low C, and the inversion represented by selective reactivation of rift faults during the post- rift stage as a result of compressional far- field stress. Interpretation of inversion was based on the occurrence of depocentres in a higher structural position than the neighbour blocks with respect to the newest stratigraphic unit and the observation of displacement variations along a fault on which normal displacement occurs in the deeper segment and reverse displacement occurs in the shallower segment. Based on the contrasting strain and depocentre distribution, filling patterns and lithologies, we interpret the syn- rift supersequence as constituted of two distinct rift phases, where the rift phase 1 RP1 comprises SRI, and rift stage 2 RP2 comprises SRII combined with SRIII. Our subdivision of RTR, PRI and PRII closely follows the general classifications of rift transition and post- rift stages proposed by Olivito and Souza 2020 and Winter et al. 2007 respectively compare Figures 2 and 6 . One of the main differences between our interpretation of the rift evolution in the study area from the previous study by Olivito and Souza 2020 is that these authors assigned a climax rift stage to the whole interval below the rift transition, in agreement with most of the previous publications e.g., Winter et al., 2007 Figure 2 . Our interpretation is to replace the climax rift stage of Olivito and Souza 2020 with a syn- rift supersequence. On the other hand, we agreed with the term rift transition proposed by Olivito and Souza 2020 , where the RTR mimics characteristics of both syn- rift and post- rift stages. By the way of summary, we present our interpretation of the tectono- stratigraphic evolution of the pre- salt sequence in the North of the Campos Basin as a series of evolutionary schematic sections in Figure 9. It presents two cross- sections located north and south of the accommodation zone Figure 5a , equivalent in location to the geological cross- sections of Figure 6b,c, respectively. Figure 9 emphasizes the general features of the sediment fill geometries and bounding surfaces. This figure demonstrates that the subsidence is often diachronous and heterogeneous from SRI to PRI, along and across the GFS horst, leading to sedimentary thickening contemporaneous to aggradational depositional patterns, and sub- aerial exposure thus erosion in each of the TSSs. Based on the tectono- stratigraphic maps Figure 8 and the evolutionary schemes of Figure 9, Figure 10 summarizes in map view the strain distribution and depocentre creation of each of the rift phases RP1 and RP2 during the deposition of the syn- rift supersequence. The extension directions for each of the rift phases were established as being roughly orthogonal to the major active fault segments thus depocentre distribution. Figure 10 also shows the effects of the roughly NW- SE structure transverse to the GFS in the structural style and strain evolution during the syn- rift stage. While acting as a WNW- ESE- oriented kinematic buffer during RP1, the NW- SE structure is interpreted as an accommodation zone during the RP2 with close spatial relation with the Vito ria- Colatina Lineament Figure 4a . 4.3.1 Rift phase 1 RP1 Rift phase 1 RP1 took place over a crustal framework constituted of two distinct Precambrian basement STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT EAGE 1671 F I G U R E 8 Tectono- stratigraphic maps of the syn- rift sequences SRI a, SRII b, SRIII c and rift transition RTR d built according to Figure 3. Polygons represent the active faults for each tectonic stage of which the corresponding thickness map is shown domains Strugale et al., 2021 . In Figure 11, a cluster of faults with minor displacements 200 m can be seen to the east i.e., the Guriri Fault System East branch GFSE , in contrast with sparse faults with major displacements 400 m up to 900 m to the west GFSN- S , reflecting the duality in basement geology, 1672 EAGE STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT F I G U R E 9 Schematic geological cross- sections summarizing the tectono- stratigraphic evolution of the pre- salt sequence in the study area in the north left and south right of the NW- SE accommodation zone. The column on the right shows the main tectonic stages here interpreted. Black arrows represent local subsidence and uplift based on depositional geometries and thicknesses of each stage. The sections are not to scale and are vertically exaggerated. SBU Sub- aerial unconformity exposure Discussion in the text STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT EAGE 1673 F I G U R E 1 0 Schematic draft showing the strain distribution during the RP1 and RP2 see text for discussion . Depocentres are coloured according to the age of filling tectono- stratigraphic sequence yellow SRI, orange to red SRII plus SRIII . Notice how the isolated grabens of RP1 are replaced with long and continuous depocentres bounded by the GFS horst. The accommodation zone is suggested to have a relation with the Vito ria- Colatina lineament based on its location on the map of Figure 4a not to scale whose implications for rift- related strain are discussed in Strugale et al. 2021 . Most of the early available accommodation space during syn- rift I SRI was concentrated in N- S to NNE- SSW elongated half- grabens filled with syn- tectonic sediments Figure 10 . Graben asymmetry is given by west- bounding faults, whose fault tips are often delimited by WNW ESE lineaments Figure 8a . Low C exemplifies these N- S striking half- graben, with its divergent fill, two internal truncation surfaces and footwall erosion Figures 6c and 9 . Otherwise, most of the SRI internal geometry of seismic reflectors is parallel and therefore does not suggest syn- depositional GFSN faulting Figures 6a,b and 7a . Earlier deposition of the SRI is represented by the syn- tectonic volcaniclastic sediments of the Cabiu nas Formation. The lack of high- amplitude anomalies suggests a low volcanic clastic ratio for this interval. This contrasts with the thicker Cabiu nas Formation and other correlated magmatic intrusions in the Central and Southern Campos Basin Stanton et al., 2019 . Once the grabens were filled, sedimentation spread more widely resulting in an aggradational filling pattern that tapered even the most prominent footwalls in the GFSS 1674 STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT EAGE F I G U R E 1 1 Fault framework of early syn- rift SRI superposed on the basement geology map modified from Strugale et al., 2021 comparing the fault distribution and the main basement units. Notice the obliquity between RP1 faults and basement structures in the FWC. The thickness map of the SRI sequence is also shown, on the left, along with the main boundaries of basement geology superimposed. CFTD, Cabo Frio tectonic domain NProt, neoproterozoic PProt, paleoproterozoic Figures 6c and 9 . This pattern suggests that an early phase of sediment- starved grabens was followed by the widespread creation of accommodation space and sedimentation. Following the terminology of Prosser 1993 , the overall filling pattern of rift phase 1 suggests a cycle of syn- rift to late post- rift half- graben fill, in which the rift initiation system is not recognized. This interpretation, however, should be considered preliminary due to the low seismic resolution and lack of wellbore calibration in the depocentres. Thickness and paleostress analyses in the SRI are somewhat difficult because the extensive erosion and localized inversions that preceded the RP2. The geometry of N- S to NNE- SSW striking half- grabens delimited by WNW- ESE lineaments suggests a WNW- ESE extension Figure 10a that either reactivated basement structures or nucleated new faults depending on the basement domains Strugale et al., 2021 Figure 11 . In turn, the gentle obliquity between NE- SW basement structure and NNE- SSW rift faults in the FWC could suggest some degree of left- lateral kinematics on basement structures Figure 10 . The left- stepping geometry of the depocentres and fault tips suggests that extension was partially accommodated as right- lateral kinematics on the WNW- ESE transverse structure Figure 8a . The contrasting thicknesses across this structure suggest that it acted as a hinge for local subsidence. 4.3.2 Rift phase 2 RP2 After a period of relative tectonic quiescence and erosion non- deposition, another pulse of fault activity occurred, initially restricted to the Guriri Fault System North branch GFSN , followed by widespread faulting that was either newly formed or reactivated rift phase 1 RP1 faults. Consequently, the GFSE was fully established, new W- dipping were formed on the GFSS and major faults STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT developed in the GFSN, resulting in major overprinting of rift phase 2 RP2 over RP1 structures Figures 8 and 10 . The first stage of RP2 deposition occurred during the syn- rift II SRII sequence in a mini basin Low A in the hanging wall block of the GFSN branch. Fault growth and linkage inherited from the previously E- W to NE- SW trending RP1 faults resulted in a fault zone whose main segments were sigmoidal Figure 8b . Towards the syn- rift III SRIII sequence, thicker depocentres migrated southwards along the GFSN, from Low A2 to Low A3, away from the thicker SRI A1 Low depocentre see Figure 7a c . Such southward strain migration kept active during the rift transition sequence RTR . This along strike strain migration suggests that the GFSN was part of a longer fault zone that extended northwards out of seismic coverage on which the strain had been propagating southwards until the rift transition phase Figure 10 . Also, the increasingly lower fault dip angles 30 northwards suggest that rotation of fault planes during extension led to the locking of the fault c.f. Reston, 2020 and therefore strain had to migrate southwards. The filling pattern of the early RP2 i.e., SRII is characterized by classic sediment- starved underfilled half- graben accompanied by divergent wedges, footwall uplift and erosion i.e., fault scarp in the position of maximum displacement of GFSN Figure 6a . Such a pattern is reminiscent of the rift climax or through- going faulting stages of, respectively, Prosser 1993 and Gawthorpe and Leeder 2008 Figure 9 . Rift initiation or pre- rift layers are represented by RP1 deposits Figure 6a,b,d . Discrete onlap of SRII onto the tI A horizon Figure 6a suggests that fault rotation occurred prior to the onset of deposition, consistent with the unconformable character of the tI A plus tSRII unconformity Figure 6c,f . A period of non- deposition within the Inner GFS Low occurred before the onset of SRIII deposition, as evidenced by the onlaps of SRIII onto the tSRII surface Figure 6b,d . Sub- aerial exposure and erosion occurred elsewhere, tuning the seismic response of the tSRII and tI A surfaces. These suggest that another episode of tectonic activity could have rearranged the depositional systems, leading to a long enough period of sediment starvation that allowed the deformation of the substrate that was subsequently onlapped by the SRIII Figure 6d . The depositional pattern of SRIII completed the tapering of the structural relief of SRII, exemplified by the wide occurrence of SRIII Figure 7c and its onlapping onto syn- SRII fault scarps and the footwall complex FWC Figure 9 . Divergent wedges occurring against segments in the south of GFSN, in the GFSE, and west of GFSS Figure 6a,b,c imply that most of the GFS structures were still active in this interval. The overall strain distribution during RP2 is relatively homogeneous, defining the present- day rift- related EAGE 1675 structural compartmentalization of the study area Figure 5a . The tectono- stratigraphic maps shown in Figure 8b,c shows that the two major rift faults, GFSN and GFSE southern part , are collinear but have opposite dip directions. This change in polarity occurs across the NW- SW accommodation zone Figure 10 . The dominant NE- SW strike of the normal faults with major displacement and length is argued to be the result of an NW- SE to WNW- ESE extension during the rift phase 2 RP2 Figure 10 . Besides this rotation of the extension direction with respect to rift phase 1 RP1 , it was still slightly oblique to the basement structural grain, hence some left- lateral reactivation could still occur. However, a few but remarkable N- S faults were active during the syn- rift III sequence SRIII deposition, exemplified in Figure 6b and by an N- S graben within the NW- SE accommodation zone Figure 8c . Therefore, we argue for a slight anticlockwise rotation of the extension direction to WNW- ESE during SRIII and a secondary right- lateral kinematics along the NW SE trend Figure 10 . Figure 12 exemplifies the potential effects of such change in the extension direction in an area where two non- parallel major segments of the GFSN interact. Notice how the post- syn- rift II sequence SRII deformation by amplification of hanging wall folding as a consequence of localized shortening preceded and therefore is onlapped by SRIII. This shortening is also noticeable during the rift transition RTR sequence as evidenced by the onlap onto folded tRift Figure 12a . 4.3.3 The rift transition phase The rift transition phase is equivalent to the RTR sequence and marks the onset of thermal subsidence coeval with regional tilting to SW and localized faulting related to the ongoing displacement of rift phase 2 RP2 faults. The isopach map demonstrates the interaction of the processes above, leading to the accumulation of remarkable carbonate mounds in the hanging wall of the Guriri Fault System North GFSN branch and an overall thickening of the RTR towards the SW see Figure 8 . Active deformation during the RTR shown in Figure 8d is restricted to fault segments located within the GFS branches, most notably in the southern sector of GFSN Figure 12 . Strike and dip attributes resemble the later RP2 structures. The onset of SW tilting resulted in localized erosion of later RP2 deposits i.e., SRIII in structural highs, mainly in the Well 33 High W33H within the Outer GFS Low Figure 7d . The extensive erosion that predates the post- rift deposition suggests increasing tilting during the transition to the post- rift and therefore explains the gentle onlap of both RTR and Post- Rift I PRI sequences onto the tRift and Post- rift Unconformity 1676 STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT EAGE F I G U R E 1 2 Pair of cross- sections showing a complex set of faults, folds, onlaps and truncations related to the interaction of N- S and NE- SW faults in the GFSN branch. Folds of syn- rift age are hanging wall folds related to displacement variations due to segment linkage see Figure 8 , amplified by SRIII shortening that also produced RTR folds. Post- rift folds are related to regional tectonic shortening during late post- rift inversion see Discussion in Section 4.3.4 PRU , respectively, and their overall thickening towards SW Figures 7d and 9 . The prominent mounds that developed during RTR are anomalous against this background of uniform sedimentation and gently varying thickness. The geometry and spatial organization of the westward prograding mounded build- ups are the result of 1 southward along strike migration of strain locus in GFSN that 2 enhance the faulting related to footwall degradation, thus creating depositional space in the hanging wall demonstrated by prograding wedges Figure 6b that are 3 fed with sediments as the result of increasing substrate gradient by footwall FWC uplift. In the FWC, the deposition occurred in shallow conditions with events of sub- aerial exposure, thus working as a by- pass zone Olivito Souza, 2020 Figure 9 . We interpret that paleostress during the RTR resembles that observed in the latter part of RP2 i.e., WNW- ESE extension and right- lateral kinematics in the NW SE lineaments , which explains both NE- SW and N- S normal faulting Figure 8d . Thicker RTR sediments south of the NW- SE trend could suggest a normal fault component with downthrowing block to the South Figures 7d and 8d . Finally, the diminution of active faulting and the onset of tilting suggests that thermal subsidence had superseded the rift- related extension Figure 9 . The overall thickening to SW observed in RTR and in the post- rift I sequence is part of a wider depocentre that extends towards the Corvina- Parati Low Figure 4a . 4.3.4 The post- rift phase The post- rift supersequence was deposited under a thermal subsidence regime, leading to an aggradational filling pattern that healed residual relief on the rift- related structures. Subsidence during Post- Rift I PRI was asymmetric and thickens westwards, while in the Post- Rift II PRII STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT is uniform, followed by sub- aerial exposure and erosion preceding the evaporite deposition Figure 9 . There was some minor syn- depositional faulting during the PRI, but this was restricted to the active segments during the rift transition phase. The group of carbonate mounds are also anchored over the upward projection of underlying faults but shows no thickness variations across the structures Figure 13 . Towards the top of the PRII sequence and throughout evaporite deposition, inversion by selective reactivation of rift- related faults resulted in a set of fault- propagation folds Figure 14 . We interpret most of the fault- propagation folds in the study area as related to the inversion of normal faults through compression thought to be orthogonal to the faults. The main evidence is the hanging wall of the previously normal faults is higher than the footwalls Figure 13c,d Konstantinovskaya et al., 2007 Letouzey et al., 1990 Withjack et al., 2002 . There were significant changes in the intensity of reactivation along the strike of GFSN. In the south, inversion is restricted to the hanging wall Figures 9 and 13c , while inversion folds involved both hanging and footwall blocks towards the north, leading to widespread uplift of both GFSN and the adjacent footwall FWC Figure 13b . SE dipping normal faults were apparently inverted in the FWC, which suggests the contribution of reactivation of Precambrian metamorphic fabric that resembles the dip and strikes direction of the rift faults in this location Strugale et al., 2021 . It also resulted in a monocline structure in the hanging wall block and the formation of up to 500 m of structural relief. The presence of a relict pod of salt on the western side suggests that the structural relief was active during salt tectonics Figure 13b . Notice that the inversion- related folds have no correlation with salt thickness, therefore are not the result of errors during the time- depth conversion due to velocity variations related to variations in the salt thickness. The interpretation of paleostresses related to tectonic inversion is problematic because of the thin sedimentary cover and strong coupling between inversion and the inverted faults. Therefore, newly formed structures may not directly reflect the new stress field but rather the structure that has been reactivated c.f. Kelly et al., 1999 . The orientation of the inversion folds at first suggests a simple NW- SE shortening. However, the framework of fold axes in the thicker southern half of Figure 13a shows two sets of NNE- SSW and NW- SE hinge lines, both deforming the bSalt horizon Figure 13e . The erosion in the hinge zones of fault- propagation folds FPFs and truncations on the Post- rift II PRII sequence by the bSalt horizon is interpreted as the result of significant long- term sub- aerial exposure of the top of EAGE 1677 PRII, thus related to the base- salt unconformity BSU . Also, a folded geometry is observed towards the top of the salt in some localities Figure 13c,d , implying that folding was active for a significant time after the onset of evaporite deposition and potentially until the onset of the salt tectonics in the Albian Cobbold Szatmari, 1991 Fetter, 2009 . In addition, assuming that the inversion leads to localized e.g., segments of Guriri Fault system East GFSE or generalized GFSN and footwall complex FWC uplift, this could have delayed the onset evaporite deposition over these areas. Consequently, using the basin scale correlations to estimate the age of the onset of evaporite deposition in the context of the study area could be problematic Davison, 2007 Kukla et al., 2018 Szatmari et al., 2021 . Meanwhile, it is possible that there was significant sub- aerial epigenetic karstification related to the BSU, resulting in secondary porosity in the upper section of post- rift carbonates. The occurrence of epigenetic karst on top or within carbonate sequences is well known in this type of context e.g., Saller et al., 1994 . 5 5.1 DISC USSION Strain migration during rifting The shallowing of the Moho below the present- day shelf- break of the Campos Basin has been observed in several publications Matos et al., 2021 Meisling et al., 2001 Mohriak et al., 2008 Stanton et al., 2019 . Matos et al. 2021 show that such uplift correlates with a thicker pre- salt package, referred by Figure 4b. The location of Moho uplifts in the SE Brazilian margin is considered to be related to lateral changes in the lithospheric thickness inherited from Brasiliano orogenic assembly that allowed later along rift- axis flow of plume material Morgan et al., 2020 . The presence of an important basement tectonic limit near the study area i.e., tectonic limit between the Oriental Terrane of Ribeira belt and the Cabo Frio Tectonic Domain Figure 1 Stanton et al., 2019 Strugale et al., 2021 could have worked as such a lithospheric limit. Hence, a longer residence of plume material could result in lithospheric thinning and extension thus strain localization, evidenced by the development of major rift faults and thicker depocentres such as the Corvina- Parati and Sa o Joa o da Barra Lows in the shallow waters of the Central and North Campos Basin Figure 4 . Rift basins that evolve to oceanic crust are characterized by strain diachroneity along dip and strike, meaning that the strain locus migrates towards the propagation centre Lavier Manatschal, 2006 . Consequently, rift units in a distal position will correlate to post- rift units towards the 1678 EAGE STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT F I G U R E 1 3 Tectono- stratigraphic maps of the post- rift TSSs PRI a, and PRII b . Thickness maps of each phase are superposed by polygons representing the active faults, fold axes, stratal dip and termination geometries extracted from 3D seismic. Mounds and erosive features are also shown. Fault traces of PRII b are shown with dotted borders since they do not displace the bSalt horizon onshore Figure 4b . The strain migration is not uniform and will depend, amongst other factors, on crustal heterogeneities. The occurrence of a shallower Moho under thick rift deposits could be interpreted as a proto spreading axis and therefore a strain locus during the rift phase 1 RP1 , located in the present- day shallowwater domain of the Campos Basin. During the rift phase 2 RP2 , the strain locus moved slightly eastwards Figures 3b and 10 before moving rapidly offshore jump as a consequence of a thick boudin of the upper crust c.f. Clerc et al., 2018 formed during RP1 strain localization. This buoyant boudin of the upper crust has clear spatial correlations with thinner RP2 and post- rift deposits and the occurrence of internal unconformities in the eastern half of the study area Figure 4b . The role of basement- inherited NW- SE brittle fracture and dyke swarms observed in the onshore Precambrian basement on the evolution of the rifting in the offshore domain is still a matter of debate. While some publications consider they are fundamental Alvarez et al., 2021 Fetter, 2009 , others do not recognize their expression offshore Lourenc o et al., 2016 Stanton et al., 2019 . The regional map shown in Figure 4a infers the projection of the Vito ria- Colatina lineament transecting the study area. STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT EAGE 1679 F I G U R E 1 4 a Map of folds distribution, showing their geometry and classification according to the age of formation. Dotted black lines represent the GFS branches and dotted grey lines are the accommodation zone Figure 5a . Notice the SRIII hanging wall folds in the lows A1 3 related to displacement variations on the GFSN c.f. Schlische, 1995 . b GFSN footwall- crest fold with significant proximal hanging wall deformation and possible inversion double arrowed displacement indicator . Notice the constant thickness of the post- rift across the GFSN, suggesting post- depositional deformation. c Fault- propagation folding FPF in the hanging wall of the GFSN related to reverse kinematics due to inversion, leading to uplift, erosion and scarp development. d FPF over a fault segment of the GFSE. Notice the erosive truncation in the top of the RTR and within the PRII sequence and inferred reverse faults. e FPF over a segment of the GFSE, a transverse fold centre of the section and a differential compaction fold to the west, probably amplified due to later shortening as evidenced by the deformation of the bSalt horizon 1680 EAGE Detailed 3D seismic interpretation identified an active NW- SE accommodation zone during the RP2 near the position of this regional lineament Figures 8, 10, and 14 . Similarly, a WNW- ESE trend worked as a kinematic buffer during RP1, which can be correlated with the Castelo Lineament c.f. Almeida et al., 2021 Figure 10 . Detailed 3D seismic mapping of the pre- salt sequence this work and of the basement Strugale et al., 2021 did not recognize any discrete NW- SE structure. Therefore, assuming the NW- SE and WNW- ESE lineaments here identified as being correlative to either Vito ria- Colatina or Castelo lineaments onshore is still speculative, especially the second. The inversion structures resulting from selective reactivation of NE- SW rift faults due to orthogonal compression observed towards the end of post- rift supersequence and onwards are best explained by intraplate stress propagation from oceanic mid- ridge spreading c.f. Artyushkov, 1973 . Such a mechanism had been correlated with Late Cretaceous and Tertiary inversions in the Campos Basin, competing with far- field compression from the Andean Orogen Fetter, 2009 . Considering the estimated onset of oceanic crust generation in the Campos Basin as ca. 117 Ma Heine et al., 2013 , the observed inversion in Figures 13 and 14 could be correlated with the onset of oceanic spreading thus ridge pushing. 5.2 Rift and post- rift tectono- stratigraphic evolution The filling architecture of rift basins in both natural and experimental physical and numerical is the subject of numerous publications. Amongst them, 2D and 3D models for tectono- sedimentary evolution of rift basins in general Gawthorpe Leeder, 2008 Prosser, 1993 , for continental lacustrine environments Lambiase, 1990 Morley, 2002 , and the model for rift sequence stratigraphy of Martins- Neto and Catuneanu 2010 will be compared with our interpretations. In common, these publications point to the difficult task to understand the feedback between tectonic- related and purely eustatic- driven sea lake level changes. This is especially problematic in rift basins where the fault- controlled depocentres form diachronously and the accommodation space in lacustrine settings is subject to local climate constraints, thus disregarding global eustatic curves Catuneanu, 2006 . Although the references thereof are relevant contributions to understanding the evolution of rift basins they also proposed denominations for the stages and patterns of rift filling that are far to be homogenous. The main point is that they mostly rely on the interpretation of regional 2D seismic lines to set up the models. However, our interpretation is founded on a 3D seismic survey at the STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT oilfield scale, which differs from the models mentioned. Hence, each geological cross- section here presented would fit or not in each of the models used as references Gawthorpe Leeder, 2008 Lambiase, 1990 Morley, 2002 Prosser, 1993 . For example, in the context of the RP2, the syn- rift II sequence SRII could represent either the rift climax system Prosser, 1993 , interaction and linkage stage during highstand in a lacustrine or shallow water context Gawthorpe Leeder, 2008 and early half- graben stage Morley, 2002 . Our interpretations clearly show that there is no silver bullet in the literature and therefore is pointless to put effort into trying to fit our results to any individual or a combination of these classifications. We tentatively compared our findings with the few publications focused on the petrological sedimentological content and the 2D seismic- stratigraphic architecture of a single half- graben in the shallow water domain of the Central Campos Basin Alvarenga et al., 2021 Goldberg et al., 2017 . Three syn- rift system tracts represent the rift tectono- sedimentary record as interpreted by Alvarenga et al. 2021 . Their basal unit Rift Initiation could potentially be correlated with RP1, and the upper High and uppermost Low Tectonic Activity Systems Tracts could be correlated with, respectively, SRII and syn- rift III SRIII i.e., the RP2 . Alternatively, the Low Tectonic Activity System Tract LTAST could be correlated with the Rift Transition sequence. However, this latter correlation is problematic because 1 LTAST is wedge- shaped and is similar to either SRII or SRIII, 2 the authors interpret significant LTAST syn- tectonic gravitational deposits Goldberg et al., 2017 and 3 the lack of data and interpretation in the footwall block does not allow correlations with the graben fill and a clear understanding of how fault activity evolves towards the end of rifting. From that, our choice is to use the strain distribution and evolution tied with a well- constrained seismic- stratigraphic framework, which is only possible if preceded by high- density 3D seismic mapping e.g., Figure 5 . A dense mapping of seismic horizons, faults and stratal terminations against them, followed by integration with isopach contours to build tectono- stratigraphic maps Figures 3, 8, and 14 , was the main criteria to distinguish two phases of rifting RP1 and RP2 Figures 9 and 10 . The superposing of snapshots of the strain distribution along time was the best strategy to unveil the complex strain evolution. Such an approach could fill the gap originated in the biased sampling by wellbore data i.e., wells were drilled only in the structural highs , especially regarding the lack of rock data of gravitational and reworked deposits in the regions where syn- sedimentary tectonism is expected to be high. Our interpretations reveal that the changes in strain distribution during the rifting are the product of two STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT directions of extension E- W during RP1 and roughly NW- SE during RP2 Figure 10 . PR1 is characterized by small and isolated grabens, with preserved thickness up to 900 m, while RP2 evolves to longer grabens that host up to 1800 m that often did not take advantage of RP1 faults Figure 8a c . In addition, RP1 depocenters were inverted while new faults nucleated or linked from initially isolated RP1 faults e.g., GFSN , resulting in the final horst geometry of the GFS. Such an overall pattern resembles the models of rift basins where they are initially characterized by isolated grabens with small displacements, followed by fault interaction and linkage, leading to the formation of larger grabens Gawthorpe Leeder, 2008 Gupta et al., 1998 . These models, however, do not necessarily mean a change in extension directions and do not mention different rift phases. An additional argument for two phases of rifting is the contrasting lithologies, from volcaniclastics plus coarse siliciclastics RP1 to carbonates and hybrid siltstones RP2 Figure 9 . Also, the merge of two unconformities tI A and tSRII into a single surface in most of the area is meaningful for a significative gap in the sedimentary record between RP1 and RP2, which is not observed for any other mapped horizon Figure 6 . Superimposed rift phases have been observed in rifts and are related to changes in the stress field during their evolution Bosworth, 1994 Lambiase, 1990 Morley, 2017 . In examples from the North Sea and Sudan, rift phases are directly superimposed or have a sag phase in between McHargue et al., 1992 Phillips et al., 2019 . Multiple rift phases are recognized in the NE Brazilian margin and within aulacogens in the counterpart Borborema province Matos et al., 2021 . However, the stratigraphic charts of the Campos Basin and the adjacent Santos and Espi rito Santo basins Franc a et al., 2007 Moreira et al., 2007 Winter et al., 2007 only recognize a single rift phase. Therefore, our proposal for two rift phases for the Campos Basin is a significant turning point for the knowledge of the basin. We must recognize that such an interpretation is not novel see Mohriak et al., 2008 but had been neglected in most publications afterwards. 5.3 Implications for the age of the pre- salt sequence The interpretation of two phases of rifting in the northern Campos Basin here presented shall be confronted with the new age constraints for the end of the pre- salt deposition, the onset of evaporite deposition and the post- salt sedimentary column Lima et al., 2018 Pietzsch et al., 2020 Sanjine s et al., 2022 Tedeschi et al., 2017, 2019 . Traditionally, the pre- salt sequence EAGE 1681 in the East Brazilian margin is interpreted as a single rift phase plus post- rift succession spanning 19 Myr in total, from Hauterivian 134 Ma to Late Aptian ca. 115 Ma e.g., Mohriak et al., 1990 Winter et al., 2007 . Recently, the age of the end of pre- salt deposition was interpreted as not younger than Barremian 125 Ma Pietzsch et al., 2020 and the age of evaporite deposition as being Early Aptian ca. 124 Ma Tedeschi et al., 2017, 2019 . Although the age of evaporites is still under debate see Discussion in review paper of Szatmari et al., 2021 , the problem remains how to accommodate two phases of rifting instead of one , a rift transition and a post- rift stages in a time interval ca. 10 Myr shorter than previously assumed The first option is to challenge the age of the onset of volcanism assuming it as a proxy for rift- related mechanical subsidence. In the onshore basement counterpart to the northern Campos Basin, tholeiitic dykes emplaced along NW- SE lineaments are dated as being as old as 142 Ma Berriasian Santiago et al., 2020 and 136 Ma Valanginian Pessano et al., 2021 , in close geochemical and temporal relationship with the Parana - Etendeka LIP and to early manifestations of the break- up of the South Atlantic Ocean e.g., Matos, 2021 . Also, several publications show evidence of Late Jurassic to Valanginian rift- related deposition along the proto Central Segment of the South Atlantic Ocean. For example, the Afro- Brazilian depression in Northeast Brazil Kuchle et al., 2011 Matos et al., 2021 , and Kimmeridgian L. Jurassic rift units at the base of the Camboriu Formation in the Santos Basin, equivalent to the Cabiu nas Formation Alves et al., 2020 . A simple though not definitive solution would be considering the life span of the pre- salt envelope as being the previously assumed 19 Myr Winter et al., 2007 , and therefore, the age of the onset of rifting would be at ca. 144 Ma. In this assumption, we are contesting the oldest ages of the volcanic of the Cabiu nas Formation i.e., 134 Ma . This assumption is partially supported by the mean age of emplacement of onshore dykes ca. 142 Ma in the Castelo swarm, according to Santiago et al., 2020 , which is here considered as a proxy for the onset of mechanical subsidence. The tholeiitic composition of these onshore dykes is the same as the Cabiu nas volcaniclastics Mizusaki et al., 1992 . However, although this interpretation kept the pre- salt rift plus post- rift within the global dataset of the life span of rift basins ca. 20 Myr, Woodcock, 2004 , the assumption of dyke emplacement and volcanism as a proxy to the onset of rifting is problematic, especially in the context of a magma- poor margin Morgan et al., 2020 . Therefore, an investigation focused on obtaining further radiometric ages in the pre- salt basalts, especially in the northern Campos Basin, should be considered in future works. 1682 EAGE A secondary possibility to adjust the ages of the pre- salt sequence in face of new age constraints would be to challenge both the recently proposed Barremian age for the end of the pre- salt deposition Pietzsch et al., 2020 Tedeschi et al., 2019 and the Early Aptian age for evaporite deposition Tedeschi et al., 2019 both views are contested in the review paper of Szatmari et al. 2021 . From that, our understanding is that there are good reasons to consider the correctness of the 125 Ma for the end of pre- salt deposition. This assumption is reinforced by the thick Aptian post- salt sequence described in the Campos Basin Lima et al., 2018 , later studied in detail in the SE Brazilian Margin in Sanjine s et al. 2022 , who concluded that the Aptian Albian border is 10 Ma older than previously assumed Figure 2 . If the onset of evaporite deposition occurs between 116 and 110 Ma as suggested by Szatmari et al. 2021 , it means an at least 9 Myr gap in the base- salt unconformity. Nevertheless, these authors mention the diachronous character of evaporite deposition in the proto- South Atlantic Ocean see also Farias et al., 2019 . In the northern Campos basin, we observed significant erosion on the top of the Macabu Formation Figure 9 . A similar observation was made in the shallow water domain of the Central Campos Basin Alvarenga et al., 2021 Goldberg et al., 2017 . Such a long sub- aerial exposure 9 Myr could imply the occurrence of extensive epigenetic karstification on the uppermost section of the pre- salt sequence, which was never reported in the literature on the Campos and Santos Basins. 6 CO N C LUSION S The tectono- stratigraphic record of the pre- salt of the northern Campos Basin is subdivided into syn- rift supersequence, rift transition RTR sequence and post- rift supersequence. The syn- rift is composed of three seismic tectono- stratigraphic sequences TSS SRI, II, III , and the post- rift supersequence encompasses two TSSs PRI, II , with a rift transition sequence RTR in between. Sub- aerial unconformities and their correlative conformities separate them. The main structural compartments are represented by an NE- SW- oriented horst that encompasses high and low strain domains, constituting the Guriri Fault System GFS . It is constituted by three high strain branches of normal faults named north, south and east GFSN, GFSS and GFSE respectively and a footwall complex adjacent to GFSN. The GFS horst delimits two relative structural lows, Inner GFS Low to the west and Outer GFS Low to the east. The syn- rift supersequence records two phases of rifting RP1 and RP2 , where the latter is equivalent to syn- rift STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT II SRII combined with syn- rift III sequence SRIII and the former with syn- rift I sequence SRI . Both phases recorded an initial phase of sediment- starved half- grabens followed by widespread deposition that heals the rift- related structural relief. Lithostratigraphic content also differs significantly. Rift phase RP 1 was deposited in isolated half- grabens typically defined by E- dipping NNE- SSW to N- S faults formed under a roughly WNW- ESE extension. Following the erosion and depocentre inversion of RP1 deposits, rift phase 2 RP2 sediments deposited in longer grabens formed by segment linkage of roughly NE SW fault zones dipping either east or westwards, thus defining an asymmetric horst. This horst comprises a fault system denominated Guriri Fault System GFS , correlated southwards to a previously unnamed major structural high in the Central Campos Basin. A roughly NW- SE extension was active during early RP2 SRII and slightly rotated back to WNW- ESE towards the end of RP2 SRIII . The RTR supersequence is related to the onset of asymmetric thermal subsidence coeval with localized syn- depositional faulting. Thermal subsidence dominates throughout the post- rift supersequence. Towards the end of the post- rift stage, NW- SE tectonic shortening promoted selective reverse reactivation of rift faults, resulting in the upward propagation of fault- propagation folds. They were active at least until the onset of salt tectonics during the Albian. The inversion is interpreted as the result of intraplate stress propagation triggered by the onset of oceanic spreading in the Campos Basin during Early Albian. Also, erosion of fold hinge zones means that a significant degree of sub- aerial erosion preceded the onset of evaporite deposition. Based on ages of dyke emplacement onshore, new age constraints for the end of the pre- salt deposition, and in order not to shorten the traditionally accepted span of the rift plus post- rift supersequences by half, we suggest that the onset of PR1 occurred during the Berriasian. The tectonic shortening and inversion during the post- rift have potential links with the localized syn- sedimentary hydrothermal venting during post- rift deposition and the widespread hydrothermal diagenesis recorded in the pre- salt succession. In addition, events of sub- aerial exposure point to potential epigenetic karstification on the top of RTR, PRI and PRII sequences. Hence, these pieces of information should be considered for future investigations and, mostly, for reservoir characterization and modelling of the Pre- Salt reservoir of the Campos Basin. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The results and interpretations of this paper are part of the DPhil research project of MS, funded by Petro leo STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT Brasileiro S.A. Petrobras. The authors thank Petrobras for supporting this study and for the opportunity to publish this paper. Petrobras colleagues Fernando Jardim and Bruno Carvalho are thanked for helpful discussions during the interpretation of seismic and fault data. We are grateful to Luciano P. Magnavita and Ro mulo de C. Stohler for their constructive comments on the manuscript, which led to an improved revised version. The Associate Editor Craig Magee and the two reviewers, Francisco Hilario Bezerra and David Iacopini, are thanked for their constructive comments and suggestions. We acknowledge Schlumberger for the provision of the seismic interpretation software used. PEER REVIEW The peer review history for this article is available at https publo ns.com publo n 10.1111 bre.12674. DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT The data used in this publication is of public domain. However, it belongs and are managed by the Brazil s Agency of Hydrocarbons ANP and could be requested directly to the agency for academic purposes. Therefore, the authors are not authorized to forward the data used in this publication. ORCID Michael Strugale https orcid. org 0000-0003-1106-7529 Joe Cartwright https orcid.org 0000-0003-4198-9719 REFERENCES Almeida, J., Dios, F., Mohriak, W. U., Valeriano, C. D. M., Heilbron, M., Eirado, L. G., Tomazzoli, E. 2013 . Pre- rift tectonic scenario of the Eo- Cretaceous Gondwana break- up along SE Brazil SW Africa Insights from tholeiitic mafic dyke swarms. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 369, 11 40. https doi.org 10.1144 SP369.24 Almeida, J., Heilbron, M., Guedes, E., Neubauer, F., Manfred, B., Klausen, M. B., de Morisson Valeriano, C., Bruno, H., Giro, J. P., McMaster, M. 2021 . Pre- to- syn- rift tholeiitic magmatism in a transtensive hyperextended continental margin Onshore and offshore magmatism of the Campos Basin, SE Brazil. Journal of South American Earth Sciences, 108, 103218. https doi. org 10.1016 j.jsames.2021.103218 Alvarenga, R. d. S., Kuchle, J., Iacopini, D., Goldberg, K., Scherer, C. M. d. S., Pantopoulos, G., Ene, P. L. 2021 . Tectonic and stratigraphic evolution based on seismic sequence stratigraphy Central rift section of the Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Geosciences, 11, 338. https doi.org 10.3390 geosc ience s1108 0338 Alvarez, P., Arau jo, A., Stanton, N., Oliveira, J., Ferro, R., Iemma, M., Nascimento, I., Borghi, L. 2021 . Crustal features and transfer zone of Campos Basin A review and evaluation. Second EAGE Conference on Pre- Salt Reservoir, European EAGE 1683 Association of Geoscientists Engineers. https doi. org 10.3997 2214- 4609.20218 3022 Alves, T., Fetter, M., Busby, C., Gontijo, R., Cunha, T. A., Mattos, N. H. 2020 . A tectono- stratigraphic review of continental breakup on intraplate continental margins and its impact on resultant hydrocarbon systems. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 117, 104341. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpe tgeo.2020.104341 Araujo, M. N., Perez- Gussinye, M., Mushaldev, I. 2022 . Oceanward rift migration during formation of Santos- Benguela ultra- wide rifted margin. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 524, 123. https doi.org 10.1144 SP524 - 2021- 123 Artyushkov, E. 1973 . Stresses in the lithosphere caused by crustal thickness inhomogeneities. Journal of Geophysical Research, 78, 7675 7708. https doi.org 10.1029 JB078 i032p 07675 Barnett, A. J., Fu, L., Rapasi, T., Scotellaro, C., Guha, J., Cabolova, A., Domingues, A. L. 2021 . Seismic characterization and origin of clinoforms in lacustrine depositional environments A case study from the cretaceous of the South Atlantic. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 509, 127 145. https doi. org 10.1144 SP509 - 2019- 148 Bertani, R. T., Carozzi, A. V. 1985a . Lagoa Feia formation lower cretaceous Campos Basin, offshore Brazil Rift valley type lacustrine carbonate reservoirs II. Journal of Petroleum Geology, 8, 199 220. https doi.org 10.1111 j.1747- 5457.1985. tb010 11.x Bertani, R. T., Carozzi, A. V. 1985b . Lagoa Feia formation lower cretaceous Campos Basin, offshore Brazil Rift valley type lacustrine carbonate reservoirs I. Journal of Petroleum Geology, 8, 37 58. https doi.org 10.1111 j.1747- 5457.1985.tb001 90.x Bosworth, W. 1994 . A model for the three- dimensional evolution of continental rift basins, north- East Africa. Journal of Geologische Rundschau, 83, 671 688. https doi.org 10.1007 BF002 51067 Cainelli, C., Mohriak, W. U. 1999 . Some remarks on the evolution of sedimentary basins along the eastern Brazilian continental margin. Episodes, 22, 206 216. https doi.org 10.18814 epiiu gs 1999 v22i3 008 Calegari, S. S., Neves, M. A., Guadagnin, F., Franc a, G. S., Vincentelli, M. G. C. 2016 . The Alegre lineament and its role over the tectonic evolution of the Campos Basin and adjacent continental margin, southeastern Brazil. Journal of South American Earth Sciences, 69, 226 242. https doi.org 10.1016 j. jsames.2016.04.005 Catuneanu, O. 2006 . Principles of sequence stratigraphy. Elsevier. Chang, H. K., Kowsmann, R. O., Figueiredo, A. M. F., Bender, A. A. 1992 . Tectonics and stratigraphy of the East Brazil rift system An overview. Tectonophysics, 213, 97 138. https doi. org 10.1016 0040- 1951 92 90253 - 3 Clerc, C., Ringenbach, J.- C., Jolivet, L., Ballard, J.- F. 2018 . Rifted margins Ductile deformation, boudinage, continentward- dipping normal faults and the role of the weak lower crust. Gondwana Research, 53, 20 40. https doi.org 10.1016 j.gr.2017.04.030 Cobbold, P. R., Szatmari, P. 1991 . Radial gravitational gliding on passive margins. Tectonophysics, 188, 249 289. https doi. org 10.1016 0040- 1951 91 90459 - 6 Collanega, L., Siuda, K., Jackson, C. A.- L., Bell, R. E., Coleman, A. J., Lenhart, A., Magee, C., Breda, A. 2019 . Normal fault growth influenced by basement fabrics The importance of preferential nucleation from pre- existing structures. Basin Research, 31, 659 687. https doi.org 10.1111 bre.12327 1684 EAGE Davies, G. R., Smith, L. B., Jr. 2006 . Structurally controlled hydrothermal dolomite reservoir facies An overview. AAPG Bulletin, 90, 1641 1690. https doi.org 10.1306 05220 605164 Davison, I. 2007 . Geology and tectonics of the South Atlantic Brazilian salt basins. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 272, 345 359. https doi.org 10.1144 GSL. SP.2007.272.01.18 Dias, J. L., Oliveira, J. Q., Vieira, J. C. 1988 . Sedimentological and stratigraphic analysis of the Lagoa Feia formation, rift phase of Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Brazilian Journal of Geology, 18, 252 260. https doi.org 10.25249 0375- 7536.19882 52260 Duffy, O. B., Bell, R. E., Jackson, C. A.- L., Gawthorpe, R. L., Whipp, P. S. 2015 . Fault growth and interactions in a multiphase rift fault network Horda platform, Norwegian North Sea. Journal of Structural Geology, 80, 99 119. https doi.org 10.1016 j. jsg.2015.08.015 Farias, F., Szatmari, P., Bahniuk, A., Franca, A. B. 2019 . Evaporitic carbonates in the pre- salt of Santos Basin Genesis and tectonic implications. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 105, 251 272. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpe tgeo.2019.04.020 Fetter, M. 2009 . The role of basement tectonic reactivation on the structural evolution of Campos Basin, offshore Brazil Evidence from 3D seismic analysis and section restoration. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 26, 873 886. https doi.org 10.1016 j. marpe tgeo.2008.06.005 Fossen, H., R rnes, A. 1996 . Properties of fault populations in the Gullfaks field, northern North Sea. Journal of Structural Geology, 18, 179 190. https doi.org 10.1016 S0191 - 8141 96 80043 - 5 Franc a, R. L., Del Rey, A. C., Tagliari, C. V., Branda o, J. R., Fontanelli, P. d. R. 2007 . Bacia do espi rito Santo. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, 15, 501 509. Gawthorpe, R. L., Leeder, M. R. 2008 . Tectono- sedimentary evolution of active extensional basins. Basin Research, 12, 195 218. https doi.org 10.1111 j.1365- 2117.2000.00121.x Goldberg, K., Kuchle, J., Scherer, C., Alvarenga, R., Ene, P. L., Armelenti, G., De Ros, L. F. 2017 . Re- sedimented deposits in the rift section of the Campos Basin. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 80, 412 431. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpe tgeo.2016.11.022 Guardado, L. R., Gamboa, L. A. P., Lucchesi, C. F. 1989a . Petroleum geology of the Campos Basin, Brazil, a model for a producing Atlantic type basin Part 2. In J. D. Edwards P. A. Santogrossi Eds. , Memoir 48 Vol. 48, pp. 37 79 . AAPG. Guardado, L. R., Gamboa, L. A. P., Lucchesi, C. F. 1989b . Petroleum geology of the Campos Basin, Brazil, a model for a producing Atlantic type basin Part 1. In J. D. Edwards P. A. Santogrossi Eds. , Memoir 48 Vol. 48, pp. 3 36 . AAPG. Gupta, S., Cowie, P. A., Dawers, N. H., Underhill, J. R. 1998 . A mechanism to explain rift- basin subsidence and stratigraphic patterns through fault- array evolution. Geology, 26, 595 598. https doi.org 10.1130 0091- 7613 1998 026 3C059 5 AMTER B 3E2.3.CO 2 Heine, C., Zoethout, J., Mu ller, R. D. 2013 . Kinematics of the South Atlantic rift. Solid Earth, 4, 215 253. https doi. org 10.5194 se- 4- 215- 2013 Herlinger, R., Jr., Zambonato, E. E., De Ros, L. F. 2017 . Influence of diagenesis on the quality of lower cretaceous pre- salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs from northern Campos Basin, STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT offshore Brazil. Journal of Sedimentary Research, 87, 1285 1313. https doi.org 10.2110 jsr.2017.70 Hesthammer, J., Fossen, H. 1999 . Evolution and geometries of gravitational collapse structures with examples from the Statfjord field, northern North Sea. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 16, 259 281. https doi.org 10.1016 S0264 - 8172 98 00071 - 3 Hollis, C., Bastesen, E., Boyce, A., Corlett, H., Gawthorpe, R., Hirani, J., Rotevatn, A., Whitaker, F. 2017 . Fault- controlled dolomitization in a rift basin. Geology, 45, 219 222. https doi. org 10.1130 G38s3 94.1 Karner, G. D., Gambo a, L. A. P. 2007 . Timing and origin of the South Atlantic pre- salt sag basins and their capping evaporites. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 285, 15 35. https doi.org 10.1144 SP285.2 Kelly, P., Peacock, D., Sanderson, D., McGurk, A. 1999 . Selective reverse- reactivation of normal faults, and deformation around reverse- reactivated faults in the Mesozoic of the Somerset coast. Journal of Structural Geology, 21, 493 509. https doi. org 10.1016 S0191 - 8141 99 00041 - 3 Konstantinovskaya, E. A., Harris, L. B., Poulin, J., Ivanov, G. M. 2007 . Transfer zones and fault reactivation in inverted rift basins Insights from physical modelling. Tectonophysics, 441, 1 26. https doi.org 10.1016 j.tecto.2007.06.002 Kuchle, J., dos Santos Scherer, C. M., Born, C. C., dos Santos Alvarenga, R., Adegas, F. 2011 . A contribution to regional stratigraphic correlations of the afro- Brazilian depression the Dom Joa o stage Brotas group and equivalent units late Jurassic in northeastern Brazilian sedimentary basins. Journal of South American Earth Sciences, 31, 358 371. https doi. org 10.1016 j.jsames.2011.02.007 Kukla, P. A., Strozyk, F., Mohriak, W. U. 2018 . South Atlantic salt basins Witnesses of complex passive margin evolution. Gondwana Research, 53, 41 57. https doi.org 10.1016 j. gr.2017.03.012 Lambiase, J. J. 1990 . A model for tectonic control of lacustrine stratigraphic sequences in continental rift basins. AAPG Memoir, 50, 11. Lavier, L. L., Manatschal, G. 2006 . A mechanism to thin the continental lithosphere at magma- poor margins. Nature, 440, 324 328. https doi.org 10.1038 natur e04608 Lenhart, A., Jackson, C. A.- L., Bell, R. E., Duffy, O. B., Gawthorpe, R. L., Fossen, H. 2019 . Structural architecture and composition of crystalline basement offshore West Norway. Lithosphere, 11, 273 293. https doi.org 10.1130 L668.1 Letouzey, J., Werner, P., Marty, A. 1990 . Fault reactivation and structural inversion. Backarc and intraplate compressive deformations. Example of the eastern Sunda shelf Indonesia . Tectonophysics, 183, 341 362. https doi. org 10.1016 0040- 1951 90 90425 - 8 Lima, B. E. M., De Ros, L. F. 2019 . Deposition, diagenetic and hydrothermal processes in the Aptian pre- salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs of the northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Sedimentary Geology, 383, 55 81. https doi.org 10.1016 j. sedgeo.2019.01.006 Lima, B. E. M., Tedeschi, L. R., Pestilho, A. L. S., Santos, R. V., Vazquez, J. C., Guzzo, J. V. P., De Ros, L. F. 2020 . Deep- burial hydrothermal alteration of the pre- salt carbonate reservoirs from northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil Evidence from petrography, fluid inclusions, Sr, C and O isotopes. Marine STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT and Petroleum Geology, 113, 104 143. https doi.org 10.1016 j. marpe tgeo.2019.104143 Lima, F., Sanjine s, A., Maizatto, J., Ferreira, E., Ng, C., Costa, D., Zerfass, G., Alves, C., Strohschoen Jr, O. Viviers, M. 2018 . Aptian marine post- salt rocks in Santos, Campos and Espi rito Santo basins, Brazil A biochronostratigraphical approach. 49th Congresso Brasileiro de Geologia, Rio de Janeiro, SBG. Lourenc o, F. S., Alkmim, F. F. d., Arau jo, M. N. C., Romeiro, M. A. T., Matos, G. C., Cro sta, A. P. 2016 . The Piu ma lineament, southern Espirito Santo Structural expression and tectonic significance. Brazilian Journal of Geology, 46, 531 546. https doi. org 10.1590 2317- 48892 01620 150038 Martins- Neto, M., Catuneanu, O. 2010 . Rift sequence stratigraphy. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 27, 247 253. https doi. org 10.1016 j.marpe tgeo.2009.08.001 Martins, G., Mendes, J. C., da Silva Schmitt, R., Armstrong, R. 2021 . Unravelling source and tectonic environment of an Ediacaran magmatic province from Southeast Brazil Insights from geochemistry and isotopic investigation. Lithos, 404, 106428. https doi.org 10.1016 j.lithos.2021.106428 Matos, R. M. D. d. 2021 . Magmatism and hotspot trails during and after continental break- up in the South Atlantic. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 129, 105077. https doi.org 10.1016 j. marpe tgeo.2021.105077 Matos, R. M. D. d., Krueger, A., Norton, I., Casey, K. 2021 . The fundamental role of the Borborema and Benin Nigeria provinces of NE Brazil and NW Africa during the development of the South Atlantic cretaceous rift system. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 127, 104872. https doi.org 10.1016 j. marpe tgeo.2020.104872 McHargue, T. R., Heidrick, T. L., Livingston, J. E. 1992 . Tectonostratigraphic development of the interior Sudan rifts, Central Africa. Tectonophysics, 213, 187 202. https doi. org 10.1016 0040- 1951 92 90258 - 8 McLeod, A. E., Dawers, N. H., Underhill, J. R. 2000 . The propagation and linkage of normal faults Insights from the strathspey Brent Statfjord fault array, northern North Sea. Basin Research, 12, 263 284. https doi. org 10.1111 j.1365- 2117.2000.00124.x Meisling, K. E., Cobbold, P. R., Mount, V. S. 2001 . Segmentation of an obliquely rifted margin, Campos and Santos basins, southeastern Brazil. AAPG Bulletin, 85, 1903 1924. https doi. org 10.1306 8626D 0A9- 173B- 11D7- 86450 00102 C1865D Mizusaki, A. M. P., Petrini, R., Bellieni, P., Comin- Chiaramonti, P., Dias, J., De Min, A., Piccirillo, E. M. 1992 . Basalt magmatism along the passive continental margin of SE Brazil Campos Basin . Contributions to Mineralogy and Petrology, 111, 143 160. https doi.org 10.1007 BF003 48948 Mohriak, W., Mello, M., Dewey, J., Maxwell, J. 1990 . Petroleum geology of the Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 50, 119 141. https doi. org 10.1144 GSL.SP.1990.050.01.07 Mohriak, W., Nemc ok, M., Enciso, G. 2008 . South Atlantic divergent margin evolution Rift- border uplift and salt tectonics in the basins of SE Brazil. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 294, 365 398. https doi.org 10.1144 SP294.19 Moreira, J. L. P., Madeira, C. V., Gil, J. A., Machado, M. A. P. 2007 . Bacia de Santos. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, 15, 531 549. EAGE 1685 Morgan, J. P., Taramo n, J. M., Araujo, M., Hasenclever, J., Perez- Gussinye, M. 2020 . Causes and consequences of asymmetric lateral plume flow during South Atlantic rifting. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 117, 27877 27883. https doi.org 10.1073 pnas.20122 46117 Morley, C. K., Nelson, R. A., Patton, T. L., Munn, S. G. 1990 . Transfer zones in the east African rift system and their relevance to hydrocarbon exploration in rifts. AAPG Bulletin, 74, 1234 1253. https doi.org 10.1306 0C9B2 475- 1710- 11D7- 86450 00102 C1865D Morley, C. K. 2002 . Evolution of large normal faults Evidence from seismic reflection data. AAPG Bulletin, 86, 961 978. https doi. org 10.1306 61EED BFC- 173E- 11D7- 86450 00102 C1865D Morley, C. K., Ionnikoff, Y., Pinyochon, N., Seusutthiya, K. 2007 . Degradation of a footwall fault block with hanging- wall fault propagation in a continental- lacustrine setting How a new structural model impacted field development plans, the Sirikit field, Thailand. AAPG Bulletin, 91, 1637 1661. https doi. org 10.1306 06280 707014 Morley, C. K. 2017 . The impact of multiple extension events, stress rotation and inherited fabrics on normal fault geometries and evolution in the Cenozoic rift basins of Thailand. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 439, 413 445. https doi. org 10.1144 SP439.3 Moulin, M., Aslanian, D., Unternehr, P. 2010 . A new starting point for the south and equatorial Atlantic Ocean. Earth- Science Reviews, 98, 1 37. https doi.org 10.1016 j.earsc irev.2009.08.001 Muniz, M. C., Bosence, D. W. J. 2015 . Pre- salt microbialites from the Campos Basin offshore Brazil Image log facies, facies model and cyclicity in lacustrine carbonates. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 418, 221 242. https doi. org 10.1144 SP418.10 Muniz, M. C., Bosence, D. W. J. 2018 . Lacustrine carbonate platforms Facies, cycles, and tectonosedimentary models for the presalt Lagoa Feia group lower cretaceous , Campos Basin, Brazil. AAPG Bulletin, 102, 2569 2597. https doi. org 10.1306 05111 81620 617087 Olivito, J. P. R., Souza, F. J. 2020 . Depositional model of early cretaceous lacustrine carbonate reservoirs of the Coqueiros formation- northern Campos Basin, southeastern Brazil. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 111, 414 439. https doi.org 10.1016 j. marpe tgeo.2019.07.013 Pessano, P. C., Ganade, C. E., Tupinamba , M., Teixeira, W. 2021 . Updated map of the mafic dike swarms of Brazil based on airborne geophysical data. Journal of South American Earth Sciences, 107, 103076. https doi.org 10.1016 j.jsames.2020.103076 Phillips, T. B., Fazlikhani, H., Gawthorpe, R. L., Fossen, H., Jackson, C. A. L., Bell, R. E., Faleide, J. I., Rotevatn, A. 2019 . The influence of structural inheritance and multiphase extension on rift development, the northern North Sea. Tectonics, 38, 4099 4126. https doi.org 10.1029 2019T C005756 Pietzsch, R., Oliveira, D. M., Tedeschi, L. R., Neto, J. V. Q., Figueiredo, M. F., Vazquez, J. C., Souza, R. S. 2018 . Palaeohydrology of the lower cretaceous pre- salt lacustrine system, from rift to post- rift phase, Santos Basin, Brazil. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, 507, 60 80. https doi. org 10.1016 j.palaeo.2018.06.043 Pietzsch, R., Tedeschi, L. R., Oliveira, D. M., dos Anjos, C. W. D., Vazquez, J. C., Figueiredo, M. F. 2020 . Environmental 1686 EAGE conditions of deposition of the lower cretaceous lacustrine carbonates of the Barra Velha formation, Santos Basin Brazil , based on stable carbon and oxygen isotopes A continental record of pCO2 during the onset of the oceanic anoxic event 1a OAE 1a interval Chemical Geology, 535, 119457. https doi. org 10.1016 j.chemg eo.2019.119457 Ponte, F. C., Asmus, H. E. 1976 . The Brazilian marginal basins Current state of knowledge. In International Symposiumon Continental Margins of Atlantic Type Vol. 48 . Academia Brasileira de Cie ncias. Prosser, S. 1993 . Rift- related linked depositional systems and their seismic expression. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 71, 35 66. https doi.org 10.1144 GSL. SP.1993.071.01.03 Rabinowitz, P. D., LaBrecque, J. 1979 . The Mesozoic South Atlantic Ocean and evolution of its continental margins. Journal of Geophysical Research, 84, 5973 6002. https doi. org 10.1029 JB084 iB11p 05973 Reston, T. 2020 . On the rotation and frictional lock- up of normal faults Explaining the dip distribution of normal fault earthquakes and resolving the low- angle normal fault paradox. Tectonophysics, 790, 228550. https doi.org 10.1016 j. tecto.2020.228550 Saller, A. H., Budd, D. A., Harris, P. M. 1994 . Unconformities and porosity development in carbonate strata Ideas from a Hedberg conference. AAPG Bulletin, 78, 857 872. https doi. org 10.1306 A25FE 3C9- 171B- 11D7- 86450 00102 C1865D Sanjine s, A. E. S., Viviers, M. C., Costa, D. S., dos Anjos Zerfass, G. d. S., Beurlen, G., Strohschoen, O., Jr. 2022 . Planktonic foraminifera from the Aptian section of the southeastern Brazilian Atlantic margin. Cretaceous Research, 134, 105141. https doi. org 10.1016 j.cretr es.2022.105141 Santiago, R., de Andrade Caxito, F., Neves, M. A., Dantas, E. L., de Medeiros Ju nior, E. B., Queiroga, G. N. 2020 . Two generations of mafic dyke swarms in the southeastern Brazilian coast Reactivation of structural lineaments during the gravitational collapse of the Arac uai - Ribeira orogen 500 ma and West Gondwana breakup 140 ma . Precambrian Research, 340, 105344. https doi.org 10.1016 j.preca mres.2019.105344 Schlische, R. W. 1995 . Geometry and origin of fault- related folds in extensional settings. AAPG Bulletin, 79, 1661 1678. https doi. org 10.1306 7834D E4A- 1721- 11D7- 86450 00102 C1865D Schmitt, R. S., Trouw, R. A. J., Van Schmus, W. R., Pimentel, M. M. 2004 . Late amalgamation in the central part of West Gondwana New geochronological data and the characterization of a Cambrian collisional orogeny in the Ribeira Belt SE Brazil . Precambrian Research, 133, 29 61. https doi. org 10.1016 j.preca mres.2004.03.010 Schmitt, R. S., Trouw, R. A. J., Van Schmus, W. R., Passchier, C. W. 2008 . Cambrian orogeny in the Ribeira Belt SE Brazil and correlations within West Gondwana Ties that bind underwater. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 294, 279 296. https doi.org 10.1144 SP294.15 Schmitt, R. S., Trouw, R., Van Schmus, W. R., Armstrong, R., Stanton, N. S. G. 2016 . The tectonic significance of the Cabo Frio tectonic domain in the SE Brazilian margin A Paleoproterozoic through cretaceous saga of a reworked continental margin. Brazilian Journal of Geology, 46, 37 66. https doi.org 10.1590 2317- 48892 01620 150025 STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT Sharp, I., Gillespie, P., Morsalnezhad, D., Taberner, C., Karpuz, R., Verge s, J., Horbury, A., Pickard, N., Garland, J., Hunt, D. 2010 . Stratigraphic architecture and fracture- controlled dolomitization of the cretaceous Khami and Bangestan groups An outcrop case study, Zagros Mountains, Iran. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 329, 343 396. https doi. org 10.1144 SP329.14 Sibson, R. H. 1992 . Fault- valve behavior and the hydrostatic- lithostatic fluid pressure interface. Earth Science Reviews, 32, 141 144. https doi.org 10.1016 0012- 8252 92 90019 - P Stanton, N., Kusznir, N., Gordon, A., Schmitt, R. S. 2019 . Architecture and Tectono- magmatic evolution of the Campos rifted margin Control of OCT structure by basement inheritance. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 100, 43 59. https doi. org 10.1016 j.marpe tgeo.2018.10.043 Strugale, M., Schmitt, R. d. S., Cartwright, J. 2021 . Basement geology and its controls on the nucleation and growth of rift faults in the northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Basin Research, 33, 27. https doi.org 10.1111 bre.12540 Szatmari, P., de Lima, C. M., Fontaneta, G., de Melo Lima, N., Zambonato, E., Menezes, M. R., Bahniuk, J., Coelho, S. L., Figueiredo, M., Florencio, C. P. 2021 . Petrography, geochemistry and origin of South Atlantic evaporites The Brazilian side. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 127, 104805. https doi. org 10.1016 j.marpe tgeo.2020.104805 Tedeschi, L. R., Jenkyns, H. C., Robinson, S. A., Sanjine s, A. E. S., Viviers, M. C., Quintaes, C. M. S. P., Vazquez, J. C. 2017 . New age constraints on Aptian evaporites and carbonates from the South Atlantic Implications for oceanic anoxic event 1a. Geology, 45, 543 546. https doi.org 10.1130 G38886.1 Tedeschi, L. R., Jenkyns, H. C., Robinson, S. A., Lana, C. C., Menezes Santos, M. R. F., Tognoli, F. M. W. 2019 . Aptian carbon- isotope record from the Sergipe- Alagoas Basin New insights into oceanic anoxic event 1a and the timing of seawater entry into the South Atlantic. Newsletters on Stratigraphy, 53, 529. https doi.org 10.1127 nos 2019 0529 Thompson, D. L., Stilwell, J. D., Hall, M. 2015 . Lacustrine carbonate reservoirs from early cretaceous rift lakes of Western Gondwana Pre- salt coquinas of Brazil and West Africa. Gondwana Research, 28, 26 51. https doi.org 10.1016 j.gr.2014.12.005 Trouw, R. A., Peternel, R., Ribeiro, A., Heilbron, M., Vinagre, R., Duffles, P., Trouw, C. C., Fontainha, M., Kussama, H. H. 2013 . A new interpretation for the interference zone between the southern Brasi lia belt and the Central Ribeira belt, SE Brazil. Journal of South American Earth Sciences, 48, 43 57. https doi.org 10.1016 j.jsames.2013.07.012 Walsh, J. J., Torremans, K., Gu ven, J., Kyne, R., Conneally, J., Bonson, C. 2018 . Fault- controlled fluid flow within extensional basins and its implications for sedimentary rock- hosted mineral deposits. In A. M. Arribas J. L. Mauk Eds. , Metals, minerals, and society Vol. 21 . Society of Economic Geologists SEG . Winter, W. R., Jahnert, R. J., Franc a, A. B. 2007 . Bacia de Campos. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, 15, 511 529. Wiprut, D., Zoback, M. D. 2000 . Fault reactivation and fluid flow along a previously dormant normal fault in the northern North Sea. Geology, 28, 595 598. https doi.org 10.1130 0091- 7613 2000 28 3C595 FRAFF A 3E2.0.CO 2 Withjack, M. O., Schlische, R. W., Olsen, P. E. 2002 . Rift- basin structure and its influence on sedimentary systems. SEPM Special Publication, 73, e0057. https doi.org 10.2110 pec. 02.73.0057 STRUGALE and CARTWRIGHT Woodcock, N. H. 2004 . Life span and fate of basins. Geology, 32, 685 688. https doi.org 10.1130 G20598.1 Wright, V. P., Barnett, A. J. 2015 . An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic early cretaceous lacustrine carbonates. Geological Society London Special Publications, 418, 209 219. https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.3 SUPPORTING INFORMATION Additional supporting information may be found in the online version of the article at the publisher s website. EAGE 1687 How to cite this article Strugale, M. Cartwright, J. 2022 . Tectono- stratigraphic evolution of the rift and post- rift systems in the northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Basin Research, 34, 1655 1687. https doi.org 10.1111 bre.12674

[END_OF_PAPER]

Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on January 12, 2021 Seismic-scale geometries and sequence-stratigraphic architecture of Early Cretaceous syn-post rift carbonate systems, Presalt Section, Brazil M. Minzoni1,2 , A. Cantelli3, J. Thornton3 and B. Wignall3 1 Department of Geological Sciences, University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487, USA Work carried out at Shell International Exploration Production, Houston, Texas, USA 3 Shell Brasil Petro leo Ltda, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil MM, 0000-0002-9649-1590 AC, 0000-0002-0311-480X BW, 0000-0003-1731-0876 Correspondence mminzoni ua.edu 2 Abstract Regional and detailed seismic stratigraphic analyses of Early Cretaceous Aptian presalt carbonate sections from offshore Brazil reveal the complex stratigraphic architecture of late- and post-rift lacustrine carbonate systems. The lateral and vertical distribution of calibrated seismic facies within this framework highlights the evolution through time of the carbonate system and bathymetry of the host lacustrine basin. Despite the simple, largely abiotic and microbial components, lacustrine carbonate accumulations formed complex geometries that closely resemble those observed from marine systems, suggesting that a downward-tapering carbonate production profile must have occurred. The complexity of the stratigraphic architecture reflects lateral variations in subsidence patterns combined with the interference of the basement topography, palaeowind directions and basinal filling patterns. Well-imaged clinoforms several hundred metres high attest to both the existence of significant lake-bottom topography, locally in excess of 800 m, and the occurrence of deep water at time of deposition. Platform margin trajectory and vertical and lateral architecture of clinoform packages through time reveal distinct sequence boundaries that can be correlated in detail only locally, demonstrating the impact of syndepositional tectonics, and possibly recurrent isolation of smaller lakes during lowstands. Depositional models from this study fill a gap in current understanding of lacustrine carbonate systems and offer a template for exploration and appraisal of the presalt play. The Lower Cretaceous presalt carbonate units of the South Atlantic conjugate margins Fig. 1, inset map have proven to be a highly productive hydrocarbon play since the Tupi-1 Lula field discovery well in 2006. The presalt play consists of a prolific, lacustrine source rock, a widespread and thick carbonate reservoir and a thick capping salt interval that acts both as a world-class seal and as a heat buffer, preventing overmaturation of hydrocarbons. Although several large discoveries have followed Lula, a significant number of wells penetrated non-reservoir units, indicating that significant lateral heterogeneity in reservoir quality is one of the primary risks of the play, both in exploration and in development. For this reason, the presalt carbonate intervals have received considerable attention in the last decade from both industry and academia worldwide. While the nature of the carbonate factory, whether microbial or abiotic Carminatti et al. 2009 Wright and Barnett 2015 Kattah 2017 Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al. 2017 Bastianini et al. 2019 , and the bathymetry at time of deposition, whether flat and shallow or highly variable with deep water Tremblay et al. 2014 Minzoni et al. 2017 Wright and Barnett 2017 Arienti et al. 2018 Wright and Rodriguez 2018 Simo et al. 2019 , remains controversial, there is a general agreement that deposition occurred in dominantly lacustrine basins. These basins were laterally extensive and had very restricted, if any, communication with the open ocean. Because lacustrine carbonate systems have historically received far less attention than their marine counterparts, a plethora of studies have recently focused on the petrography of nonmarine carbonate particles from both modern and ancient lacustrine analogues e.g. Wright 2012 Della Porta 2015 Wright and Barnett 2015 Mercedes-Marti n et al. 2017, 2019 and references therein . While these studies significantly advanced our knowledge of lacustrine carbonate systems, they also highlighted the uniqueness of the presalt section, in that thick accumulations of non-marine carbonate strata have no obvious modern or ancient analogues. Only a few recent studies have tackled the complex stratigraphy and seismic-scale architecture of the presalt carbonate interval Buckley et al. 2015 Ceraldi and Green 2017 Saller et al. 2016 Minzoni et al. 2017 Arienti et al. 2018 Simo et al. 2019 , and the understanding of the depositional, stratigraphic and tectonic elements that gave rise From Hendry, J., Burgess, P., Hunt, D., Janson, X. and Zampetti, V. eds Seismic Characterization of Carbonate Platforms and Reservoirs. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 509, https doi.org 10.1144 SP509-2019-78 2020 The Author s . Published by The Geological Society of London. All rights reserved. For permissions http www.geolsoc.org.uk permissions. Publishing disclaimer www.geolsoc.org.uk pub ethics Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on January 12, 2021 M. Minzoni et al. Fig. 1. Dataset used for this study, including 3D seismic surveys, wells, borehole images BHI , and cores. Inset map location of major presalt fields and exploration blocks within the Santos and Campos basins. White polygon indicates area of detailed study. TLH, Tupi Lula High GdM-E, Gato do Mato Epitonium High BHI, borehole images ACF, Alto de Cabo Frio. to the system has been notably sparse owing to confidentiality issues and a lack of detailed integration and calibration of data across scales. Recent efforts within Shell have focused on empirically characterizing the presalt carbonate interval in the Santos basin via an integration and calibration of mappable seismic facies with core, logs and borehole image data BHI Figs 1 2 . Here we summarize the extensive observations conducted at the Shell Exploration and Technology Laboratory, between 2007 and 2016, to highlight the sequence stratigraphic architecture of presalt carbonate systems of Brazil and discuss both local and basin-wide controls on their stratigraphic evolution, as well as the palaeobathymetry of the presalt lake system. For confidentiality reasons, this paper does not disclose any detail on well or core data, except for their location. As a prime example of the basin evolution in offshore Brazil, this study focuses principally on the sag interval the primary reservoir of the Santos Basin, where good-quality CGG PreStack Depth Migrated PSDM volumes were available Figs 1 2 . Geological setting and regional stratigraphy Carbonate deposition in the presalt section of Brazil started in the Early Cretaceous period, during the late phase of the south to north, multiphase rifting event which spanned from Late Jurassic to Early Cretaceous that separated South America from Africa. It continued through the transition and post-rift, thermal subsidence sag phase , associated with continent breakup and onset of a passive margin Fairhead and Wilson 2005 Davison 2007 . Rifting in the Santos Basin occurred in several phases, which are separated by regional unconformities Fig. 3 . Early rift stratigraphy consists of a thick interval of volcanic and siliciclastic units Camboriu and Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on January 12, 2021 Seismic architecture of lacustrine presalt carbonate systems Fig. 2. Semblance map of the base salt showing the details of the morphology of the carbonate shelves over the Sugar Loaf High and the Tupi Lula High TLH . Structural high boundaries are marked with a dotted line. The Sag Upper Barra Velha isochore map is also shown over the Sugar Loaf High. Note that thick sediment packages green, blue, and mauve correspond to prograding wedges see Figs 6 9 13 , while shelf tops and basins are areas of thin to null sediment accumulation red and yellow , indicating sediment starvation or erosion in those areas. Arrows indicate direction of progradation. Note also null sediment thickness along the SE margin in correspondence to arcuate features interpreted as collapse margin and bypass slopes. GdM-E, Gato do Mato Epitonium High BHI, borehole images Picarra formations Fig. 3 associated with the Parana rift volcanism and initial erosion of basement rocks composed of metasediments. Carbonate shelves, platforms and ramps of the Itapema and Barra Velha formations Minzoni et al. 2017 Simo et al. 2019 Fig. 3 developed initially on local, basement-cored highs, with intervening lows accumulating volcanic and deeper water deposits, which are inferred to contain at least part of the regional source rock intervals. A general inference from well data is that most coeval, coarse clastic settings were confined to inboard, proximal areas, with cleaner carbonates developing atop outboard basement blocks Davison 2007 Muniz and Bosence 2015 . The regional presalt stratigraphy has been extensively reviewed in several studies e.g. Pereira and Feijo 1994 Dias 2005 . The presalt across the entire South Atlantic is subdivided into a number of mega-sequences. The latest stratigraphic chart for the Santos Basin was issued by Moreira et al. 2007 after the drilling of the first presalt wells in the Sa o Paulo Plateau in deep waters of the Santos Basin. The presalt carbonate section in the Santos Basin consists of two main carbonate factory types. Coarse molluscan rudstone, grainstone and packstone of the Itapema Formation, commonly known as coquina , is widely described from the upper rift section, especially in the Campos Basin, offshore Brazil, and the conjugate West African basins e.g. Guardado et al. 1990 Mello et al. 2002 Carminatti et al. 2008 . The overlying Barra Velha Formation is a mix of carbonate mudstones, spherulitic calcite wackestones and packstones locally dolomitized , shrub-dominated framestones and grainstones composed of reworked elements of the various carbonate and volcanic lithotypes in the basin e.g. Rezende and Pope 2015 Wright and Barnett 2015, 2017 Minzoni et al. Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on January 12, 2021 M. Minzoni et al. Fig. 3. Line drawing and interpreted regional and representative seismic section for the Santos Basin, and stratigraphic chart of the Itapema and Barra Velha systems. Green and orange lines in the detailed section represent aggradational-backstepping and progradational-downstepping units, respectively. The yellow hatched lines mark the regional unconformities IAU and PAU black hatched lines mark the boundary between major aggrading and prograding units. See Figure 2 for location. Wavy red lines in the stratigraphic chart indicate regional unconformities. IAU, Intra-Alagoas Unconformity PAU, Pre-Alagoas Unconformity UBV, Upper Barra Velha LBV, Lower Barra Velha ITP, Itapema Vol., volcanics. Numbers 1 5 in both the seismic line and the line drawing indicate the position of the margin through time. Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on January 12, 2021 Seismic architecture of lacustrine presalt carbonate systems 2017 Arienti et al. 2018 Souza et al. 2018 . The abiotic carbonate component of the Barra Velha is composed almost entirely of calcite crystal shrubs and spherulites, either in place or reworked, and locally thick and laterally continuous accumulations of carbonate mud Wright 2010 Wright and Barnett 2015 Mg-silicate clay is variably present in all lithotypes, but is most typically associated with spherulitic wackestones and packstones. Although the exact origin or carbonate factory of the sag interval, whether truly microbial, microbially induced, or abiotic, is a matter of debate, the upper rift and the sag are characterized by distinct factories that differ not only in terms of components, but also in their mode of carbonate accumulation that presumably reflects a drastic change in water chemistry owing to a progressive increase in restriction, salinity and alkalinity Pietzsch et al. 2018 . Conceptual models and analogue studies from marine systems indicate that different carbonate factory types are associated not only with different porosities and permeability distributions, but also with different largescale stratigraphic architectures Pomar 2001 Schlager 2005 Della Porta et al. 2013 Minzoni et al. 2013 . The same concept and relationships are likely to be applicable to lacustrine systems, where variations in water chemistry are more extreme and should result in even larger variations in carbonate factory types and stratigraphic architectures. Data and methods Seismic stratigraphy and seismic facies were interpreted and mapped on both regional 2D lines over the Campos and Santos basins and on a large CGG PSDM 3D volume covering the entire Cluster Area Sugar Loaf High, Tupi Lula High, Iara and Jupiter High , along with the addition of smaller volumes over the Libra, Peroba and Buzios Gato de Mato Epitonium areas Figs 1 2 . Mapping over the larger cluster area was aided by the analyses of amplitude, semblance and isochore maps extracted from key seismic stratigraphic surfaces. Mapping over Libra also included observations on root mean square amplitude maps and application of a Van Gogh filter to minimize directional noise. Observations on seismic facies and seismic unconformities were calibrated with .100 wells, regionally distributed over the Campos and Santos basins and containing standard petrophysical data, core and rotary sidewall core samples, as well as borehole images. This study focuses on the Santos Basin and builds on the analysis and integration of 2D and 3D seismic data with 79 wells, including 19 with BHI logs, and 14 cores with a cumulative core thickness of approximately 1000 m. A total of 16 wells were tied to the seismic trace and used for detailed calibration of the seismic facies Figs 1 2 Table 1 . All of the seismic facies types Table 1 described in this study were tied to wells using both BHI and core material from at least one location, commonly more. At this time the BHI logs cannot be reproduced owing to confidentiality limitations. The major unconformities were identified in seismic volumes, calibrated with well data and correlated regionally. The base salt is a high-amplitude peak reflector that can be correlated across basins. The Intra-Alagoas Unconformity IAU or base sag Fig. 3 is prominent on palaeohighs but can appear conformable in palaeodepressions. The Pre-Alagoas Unconformity PAU Fig. 3 is interpreted as the switch from rifting to a transitional phase. It is a seismic angular unconformity only locally, where significant tilting of underlying strata occurred. The calibration of seismic facies consisted of an initial analysis and identification of reflector packages near the wellbores for each tied well. Each individual seismic facies zone in the well was identified by a top and a bottom based on the geometric attributes of the reflection packages see Table 1 and confirmed with BHI data where available. These intervals were then compared with both well- and core-based facies associations to help calibrate the lower resolution seismic interpretations with the higher-resolution, well-based observations. Comparisons between these two different methods generally showed good agreement, validating the seismic facies as good proxies for depositional facies and thus environment of deposition. For example, SF3 facies identified in seismic images and consisting of inclined reflectors were confirmed by inclined stratal packages observed in BHI. Where discrepancy occurred, further iterations of near-wellbore seismic facies identification were performed with corrections made where interpretational ambiguity existed. Owing to major differences between the carbonate factories characterizing the Itapema and Barra Velha depositional systems, dominated by coquina and microbial abiotic carbonate rocks, respectively, and the sparse calibration data for the rift system, only a basic workflow was applied to the Itapema Formation. This workflow relied primarily upon well data and seismic-derived maps, rather than detailed line-by-line, gridded seismic facies interpretation as was done for the Barra Velha interval. Detailed mapping of seismic facies was performed on the sag interval Upper Barra Velha only. Seismic reflection packages are classified into four main seismic facies according to their external geometric attributes and are interpreted based on the attributes of the internal reflectors and their position within the depositional profile Table 1 . Scrupulous attention was applied to the interpretation of SF1 and SF3 facies mounded and inclined, respectively Table 1 by carefully testing for residual Seismic facies SF1 SF2 External geometry Mounded convex upward Tabular Example Variation Occurrence Margin Slope Lows Shingled Chaotic Transparent Parallel Chaotic Interpretated depositional environment Grainstone Shrubs boundstone grainstone Volcanics grainstone boundstone Marginal shoals islands shallow and deep water reefs buildups islands deep water MTDs Packstone wackestone grainstone Volcanics Shelf top deposits lagoon basinal or profundal deposits Not tested Packstone wackestone Rudstone Bypass slope Accretional slope Volcanics shallow and deep water reefs buildups islands Shelf-top breccia volcanics Parallel SF3 SF4 Progradational Chaotic Chaotic Converging Inclined Wedged Poorly tested. Itapema coquina unit only. MTDs, Mass transport deposits. Not tested Laminates packstone Accretional slope Lower slope MTDs Lower slope MTDs and turbidites M. Minzoni et al. Top Lithofacies Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on January 12, 2021 Table 1. Seismic facies SF classification scheme, description, occurrence and interpretation of seismic facies Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on January 12, 2021 Seismic architecture of lacustrine presalt carbonate systems a b c Fig. 4. Upper Rift seismic facies and slope geometries over NW Libra Mero . a Seismic facies map below the Intra-Alagoas Unconformity contour lines . Note dominance of SF3 facies, and dimensions, orientation and distribution of SF1 mounded facies. b Details of fan-shaped SF3 facies and their evolution through time 1 4 from top of structure down to the NW flank. Note the prominent sector-collapse feature cutting through fan 3 and healed by fan 4. Note also a second collapse scar cutting through fan 4. c Interpreted seismic sections, oriented NW SE, through the fan system hatched lines in Fig. 4b . The fans are stacked laterally and downstep from the top of the structure to the NW flank. Note the steep angle of the prograding clinoforms penetrated by the wells and the increasing height of the clinoforms as the system progrades down a tilted basement into deeper water. Accumulation of prograding clinoforms limited to the northwestern end of the structure may indicate drifting of slope sediment northward by deep currents. Note also the progressive onlap of the Upper Barra Velha onto the underlying Upper Rift. The green hatched line marks the base of the Itapema. UBV, Upper Barra Velha ITP, Itapema. pullup artefacts and multiples from the overlying salt by comparing the reflection geometries in both intervals in map and cross-section view. Mapping of inclined facies SF3 was locally facilitated by flattening at toplap or downlap surfaces over very limited areas, and by applying a stratal convergence attribute Lomask et al. 2009 van Hoek et al. 2010 . Seismic stratigraphic architecture and morphology The geometry and termination patterns of seismic reflections can be used to extract a general sequence stratigraphic frame e.g. Mitchum et al. 1977 and also to interpret the morphological evolution of carbonate accumulations e.g. Bachtel et al. 2004 . The lateral and vertical distribution of seismic facies within this framework highlights the stratigraphic evolution of the presalt carbonate systems in the Santos Basin. The position of lacustrine coastal onlap within the defined seismic stratigraphic framework can be used as a proxy for foreshore environments and thus its position through time records base-level fluctuations Vail 1987 Buckley et al. 2015 . The shelf or platform margin marks the boundary between two very distinct settings, with the subhorizontal area or platform top being dominated by autochthonous deposition and relatively minor reworking from storms Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on January 12, 2021 M. Minzoni et al. and currents, and the slope being dominated by gravity and deep current processes. These general characteristics, which have been widely documented in marine systems, are also observed in cores that penetrated the lacustrine presalt section, although the detailed interpretation of depositional settings is complicated by the unusual nature of the specific facies. In general, platform or shelf margin facies are dominantly grain supported or are composed of autochthonous precipitates, whereas slope facies and protected, slightly deeper, shelf areas away from the margin contain a markedly higher abundance of mud- and Mg-clay-dominated textures Table 1 Fig. 4c see also Figs 1, 2, 4a for location of wells that penetrated SF3 facies interpreted as slope . The position of the shelf margin, whether truly marking base level or not, can therefore also be used as a proxy for base-level fluctuation, with the advantage of being easier to identify than coastal onlaps in seismic images. Platform and shelf margins in the presalt Santos are geometrically identified in seismic images by the slope break that separates originally subhorizontal and parallel reflectors SF2 facies from inclined or wedged reflectors SF3 and SF4 facies Table 1 , and can be classified as retrogradational backstepping, aggradational, progradational, and downstepping Fig. 3 . Despite the complexity of the stratigraphic architecture of the presalt section in the Santos Basin, a few general sequence-stratigraphic observations can be extracted for the relatively better studied and more widely distributed upper synrift and sag Itapema and Barra Velha intervals. Itapema The Itapema interval is here defined tectono-stratigraphically as the lower part of the synrift interval bounded at the base by a reginal transgression that marks the inception of carbonate deposition, and at the top by the PAU Fig. 3 Moreira et al. 2007 Winter et al. 2007 Buckley et al. 2015 Pietzsch et al. 2018 . The Itapema Formation is informally known as the coquina and has equivalences in the Campos Basin to the north Fig. 3 . Across the study area the stratigraphy of the Itapema interval is based primarily on interpretation of seismic reflection data well and core calibration was mainly limited to the Libra structure Figs 1 2 . With the exception of Libra, carbonate systems are largely untested in this interval, but seismic data indicate general progradation of inclined reflectors SF3 Table 1 during this time for the greater Santos area Fig. 3 . Although poorly constrained, details of the stratigraphy of the Itapema are important to understanding carbonate reservoir distribution in Libra and other prospects in the northern part of the Santos Basin, as well as the Campos Basin to the north and the equivalent section in the conjugate West African margin, where the upper rift coquina is the major producing reservoir Guardado et al. 1990 Mello et al. 2002 Carminatti et al. 2008 Saller et al. 2016 Barnett et al. 2020 . The Itapema in the North Santos occurs over relatively small but high-relief basement blocks, a few kilometres across and up to 800 metres high, and consists of a thick interval of inclined facies SF3 Table 1 , connecting very thin or null platform tabular-parallel facies SF2 Table 1 at the top of the basement blocks to off-platform tabular-parallel facies SF2 Table 1 with variable thickness Fig. 4 . This package records strong progradation with toplap and downlap geometries, which are indicative of minimal to negative accommodation at the platform top Fig. 4 . Local downstepping Figs 3 4 indicates forced-regression and progressive base-level fall during later depositional stages of the interval. Detailed mapping reveals that the bulk of the deposition over the NW sector of Libra occurred as a relatively localized series of leeward progradational fan- and lobe-shaped geobodies, possibly reworked by longshore currents during lowstands Barnett et al. 2020 or by deeper-water currents during highstands Fig. 4 . Mounded facies SF1 Table 1 within the upper rift interval are relatively extensive, up to 3 km long and several hundred metres wide, and up to several tens of metres thick Fig. 4a . The upwardconvex reflector packages are commonly internally chaotic or transparent, and rooted onto the underlying topographic highs, usually lining rift shoulders and windward margins. Less common SF1 facies occurring atop progradational facies are generally characterized by internal shingled reflections. Volumetrically, the Itapema at Libra is almost exclusively composed of inclined facies SF3 Table 1 with limited mounded facies SF1 Table 1 and very limited tabular-parallel facies SF2 Table 1 Fig. 4a . Inclined reflector packages are progradational, internally chaotic and steep up to 18 Fig. 4c , suggesting that the clinoforms are composed of coarse shell fragments coquina , but with local sedimentation breaks represented by hardgrounds or clay-rich intervals as highlighted by high internal reflectivity and confirmed by lithological observations from core samples Barnett et al. 2020 . The stratigraphic top of the Itapema is characterized by large arcuate scar features that extend up to 4 km along the shelf break and 1 km shelfward Fig. 4 , and by linear channel-shape structures, about 2 km long, at the base of slope that run perpendicular to the shelf margin Fig. 5 . These features are interpreted, respectively, as margin collapse and weak channelization at the base of slope, a feature commonly observed in grain-dominated carbonate slopes e.g. Playton et al. 2010 . Basinward Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on January 12, 2021 Seismic architecture of lacustrine presalt carbonate systems a b c Fig. 5. Morphology of Upper Barra Velha BVE100 clinoforms around Libra Mero field as recorded by picked Sag horizon surfaces along inclined reflectors flanking the Libra structure. a Combined top sag base of salt structure map and root mean square RMS attribute over NW Libra. Note arcuate reentrances along the margin dashed red lines , interpreted as sector collapse scars, and associated bright RMS features along the slope and proximal basin interpreted as channels and mass transport deposits. b Horizon extraction at base salt showing slope clinoform along the steeply dipping side of a tilted block. Note collapse scars red dashed line and channelized upper slope white arrows . Note also the exponential shape of the clinoform. Dip angle is about 25 . c Horizon extraction at the top of Itapema showing slope clinoform along the hanging wall, gently dipping side of a tilted block. Note channel features white arrows in the lower slope and overall sigmoidal shape. The lower slope channel features are also seen in Figure 5a at the base of the salt as elongated, bright features perpendicular to the margin in the RMS attribute dotted lines . Dip angle is c. 10 . progradation away from the underlying palaeohighs only partially filled the accommodation available at the slope, so that at the end of deposition, the platform maintained a high relief up to several hundreds of metres over the surrounding basin Fig. 4c . Lower Barra Velha BVE300 The BVE300 interval corresponds lithostratigraphically to the lower part of the Barra Velha Formation, below the IAU Fig. 3 Moreira et al. 2007 Buckley et al. 2015 Pietzsch et al. 2018 and marks the first appearance of in-situ microbial abiotic framestone. Localized mounded facies SF1 Table 1 are mapped throughout the basin, mostly aligned with basement structures and on top of rift shoulders Figs 4a 6 . SF1 facies are commonly stacked vertically to form larger composite mounds up to a few hundred metres thick and up to 1 km wide Fig. 6 . Mounded facies developed along hanging walls are locally characterized by a distinct backstepping trend Fig. 3 . Along a large sector of the Sugar Loaf High, however, the stacking pattern of the SF1 facies and shelf margins within an expanded section of the BVE300 displays a full cycle that includes backstepping and aggradation in the lower part, followed by progradation of clinoform wedges SF3 Table 1 in the upper part Fig. 3 . Additional mounded and wedged chaotic reflectors SF1 and SF4 Table 1 adjacent to the platform complexes are interpreted as re-deposited carbonate strata that contributed to the infill of the troughs during the latest stage of the synrift phase Fig. 3 . Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on January 12, 2021 M. Minzoni et al. a b c Fig. 6. East west seismic line through the Sugar Loaf High showing the synrift to post-rift stratigraphic evolution of the presalt carbonate system. See Figure 2 for location. a Uninterpreted seismic line. b Interpreted detail of the line in a with interpreted stratigraphic architecture. c Interpretation of seismic facies architecture showing asymmetric aggradation on rotating fault blocks during the BVE300 and BVE200 intervals v. distinct progradation and downstepping during BVE100 deposition. Note the different slope geometry between the Lower Barra Velha BVE300 interfingering with basin-filling reflectors and in the Upper Barra Velha BVE100 200 downlap over a starved basin . Note also the vertical stacking of SF1 facies in the BVE300 interval. The control well penetrates three different seismic facies. IAU, Intra-Alagoas Unconformity bfs, basin infilling strata cds, climbing downlap surface. Basinal sediment infill during the BVE300 was localized and impacted slope geometries and platform progradational patterns by partially filling the basin and reducing accommodation at the toe of slope Minzoni et al. 2017 Fig. 6 . A large area within the palaeolows was filled by volcanic rocks and volcanoclastic sediment Fig. 3 , as suggested by gravity and magnetic data, highly reflective seismic loops, and confirmed by several wells that penetrated this interval. Evidence of pillow-lava structures, hydrovolcanic breccias and palagonitized volcanic glass recorded in borehole images De Luca et al. 2015 indicate that at least part of the volcanic strata in the Santos Basin were deposited subaqueously however, the lateral continuity of parts of these extrusive bodies as mapped from seismic suggests that much of the interval accumulated as subaerial flows. Upper Barra Velha BVE100 and BVE200 BVE200 and BVE100 are here defined sequencestratigraphically, based on seismic unconformities, reflector geometries and terminations, and seismic facies distribution. The base of the BVE200 is a high-amplitude peak reflector marking the IAU and corresponds to a transgressive surface over the BVE300 as indicated by local progressive onlap of a Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on January 12, 2021 Fig. 7. Uninterpreted and interpreted seismic sections over the Sugar Loaf High Santos Basin . See Figure 2 for location and Figure 3 for stratigraphy. a Progradation of the BVE100 shelf margin in the interior of the large structural high filled vast areas of local basins by coalescing with horst-top aggrading BVE200 and BVE100 platforms, or b terminated before reaching the horst structure leaving an unfilled remnant basin. Note progressive onlap of the BVE200 onto the Upper Rift. UR, Upper Rift Itapema and BVE300 . Seismic architecture of lacustrine presalt carbonate systems b a Fig. 8. Slope geometry, margin trajectory, facies distribution, and sequence stratigraphic architecture of the BVE units over the Sugar Loaf High. Uninterpreted a and interpreted b seismic line of the Upper Barra Velha interval. c Higher-order sequence stratigraphic boundaries interpreted from reflector terminations and seismic facies within the BVE100 interval. See Figure 2 for location and Figure 3 for stratigraphy. IAU, Intra-Alagoas Unconformity. M. Minzoni et al. c Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on January 12, 2021 b Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on January 12, 2021 Seismic architecture of lacustrine presalt carbonate systems seismic reflections on the underlying upper rift interval Buckley et al. 2015, their figure 3 Figs 4 7 . Accordingly, areas of prevalent aggradation in the Upper Barra Velha are limited to the BVE200 Figs 3 6 9 . Aggrading margins at block shoulders produced vertically stacked mounded facies SF1 Table 1 with significant depositional relief up to about 200 m that is commonly onlapped and filled by distal slope facies of BVE100 prograding units Upper Sag Figs 6 7 . This geometry, known as climbing downlap surface, implies that the initially aggrading system was unable to prograde when subsidence rates dropped, probably owing to a pre-existing, unfilled topographic relief or a windward position, and that sediment created during deposition of the BVE100 was transported laterally to downlap the mounds Minzoni et al. 2017 Fig. 7a . The base of the BVE100 is placed at the aforementioned downlap reflector surface and correlative surfaces. It therefore coincides with a composite maximum flooding or regressive surface in the classic sequence stratigraphic models Galloway 1989 Schlager 1989, 2005 Mitchum and Van Wagoner 1991 Catuneanu et al. 2009 . The BVE100 is dominated by prograding to downstepping stacking patterns, which imply little to negative accommodation on palaeohighs Tremblay et al. 2014 Minzoni et al. 2017 Figs 6 9 . In detail, however, the strongly progradational pattern is punctuated by episodes of aggradation that define distinct sequences Buckley et al. 2015 Minzoni et al. 2017 Fig. 8 . Prograding clinoforms are generally steep 8 12 average and linear to exponential, suggesting a possible dominance of coarse-grained sediment or in-situ boundstone accumulation on the upper slope Adams and Kenter 2013 Minzoni et al. 2017 Figs 9 12 . Where progradation occurs over a shallowing upward basin or downlaps onto a relative palaeohigh, such as in coalescing margins Eberli and Ginsburg 1987 , the clinoforms display a flattening outward geometry Bosellini 1984 and a shift from planar to tangential profiles Figs 6, 7a, 9 10a . In plan view, the clinoform packages show very intricate geometries with internal erosional and reactivation surfaces. In areas of complex topography with promontories and embayments, the clinoforms display a distinctly arcuate accretion geometry Fig. 13 , similar to that observed in modern marine and lacustrine strand plains, where beach ridges accrete through storms and drift currents e.g. Thompson and Baedke 1997 Goodfriend and Stanley 1999 Tremblay et al. 2014 Minzoni et al. 2017 . a b Fig. 9. Uninterpreted a and interpreted b seismic lines of the Upper Barra Velha interval over the southern part of the Sugar Loaf High. See Figure 2 for location and Figure 3 for stratigraphy. The asymmetry of the margin is interpreted as windward leeward effect. Note the flattening outward profile of the clinoform wedge to south. Note also that the control well penetrates parallel, inclined and mounded reflectors of the BVE100 200 interval. Continuation of BVE200 mounded SF1 facies into the BVE100 near the well location is possible but note that the mound shape mimics reflections in the salt above. IAU, Intra-Alagoas Unconformity. Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on January 12, 2021 M. Minzoni et al. Fig. 10. Principal slope morphology types of the BVE100 prograding interval. a Climbing and exponential geometries of the prograding slopes over filling basin and onto a palaeohigh. Note also the flattening outward profile. b Tabular and linear geometry of the prograding clinoforms over unconfined, sediment starved basin. cds, climbing downlap surface. a b Fig. 11. Uninterpreted and interpreted seismic lines over the Tupi Lula High. See Figure 2 for location. The black hatched line in b marks the potential extension of a BVE200 mound into an area disrupted by multiples from the overlying salt. Note backstepping of SF1 mounded facies during deposition of the BVE200 interval and progradation of inclined reflectors SF3 during deposition of the BVE100 interval. Note also asymmetric progradation on the leeward west and shallow basin compared with lack of significant progradation along the steep and deep windward margin east in a . The control well to the west of the island in a records significantly higher proportion of shale and fine sediment in the BVE100 than the well to the east. MTD, mass transport deposit. Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on January 12, 2021 Seismic architecture of lacustrine presalt carbonate systems Fig. 12. Margin architecture, stacking pattern, and slope geometry along different areas of the Libra structure. a Top BVE100 base salt structure map of Libra showing three distinct highs. b Comparison of BVE100 slope profiles along a leeward margin Lm and a faulted, windward margin m2 . Slope profiles m1a to m1d show steepening through time at location m1. c Interpreted seismic lines across the margin and slope in four different areas see a for location . UR, Upper Rift Itapema and BVE300 . Note truncation of platform top SF2 reflectors in m2 and occurrence of SF4 facies marked in blue in the adjacent low. Note also that the control well in m1 penetrates parallel and mounded reflectors in the Barra Velha, and inclined reflectors in the UR. Large indentations up to several kilometres wide along the platform margin fringe all major palaeohighs and are especially well developed along faulted margins abutting deep basins Figs 2, 5, 12 13b . In these areas tabular parallel reflectors SF2 Table 1 of the platform top are truncated Fig. 12c and clinoform angles, where preserved, are steeper than average, with values of approximately 20 and up to more than 30 along the truncation surfaces erosional margins Fig. 12 . It is noteworthy that no significant progradation is observed along the steepest margins, even outside the arcuate truncation features Fig. 11a . These features are interpreted as margin collapse scars based on their morphology and size, and truncation of platform top reflectors Lehrmann et al. 2020 . Facies mapping of BV100 over prominent basement highs in the north part of the Santos Basin, such as in Libra and Buzios Fig. 1 , indicates only local progradation and certainly with significantly less lateral expansion less than 2 km compared with the underlying Itapema, which locally records lateral expansion greater than 6 km Figs 4 12c . Where significant progradation did occur, evidence of local progressive steepening of clinoforms is interpreted as in situ accretion and early lithification based on analogy with other steepening-outward prograding systems Fig. 12b Minzoni et al. 2013 Minzoni et al. 2017 . Extensive occurrence of arcuate truncation surfaces at the platform margin interpreted as collapse features also points to early lithification Minzoni et al. 2017 Lehrmann et al. 2020 . Mounded facies SF1 Table 1 in the Upper Sag interval punctuate the shelf break and are generally less than 2 km long and a few tens of metres thick, considerably smaller than their BVE200 equivalent cf. Barnett et al. 2020 . These characteristics suggest filling of accommodation in highenergy settings and potential development of elevated shoals or exposed islands Minzoni et al. 2017 . A high-energy shoal complex interpretation is reinforced by the local occurrence of shingled reflectors interpreted as clinoforms within at least some of the SF1 facies and thick accumulations Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on January 12, 2021 M. Minzoni et al. Fig. 13. Amplitude depth slices from near the base salt reflector BVE100 interval showing distinctly arcuate geometry of shelf margin trends within two embayments in the Sugar Loaf High. See Figure 2 for location. a Northern end of the Sugar Loaf shelf. PH, Palaeohigh. b Northward progradation of intra-shelf clinoforms onto an intra-high remnant basin. Note the arcuate shape of the prograding clinoforms. Arrows point to collapse scars along the SE margin of the Sugar Loaf High. F, Fault UB, up-thrown block DB, down-thrown block. c Seismic line through the progradation wedge in b . Prograding clinoforms facies SF3 are highlighted in orange. Note also local SF1 mounded facies in the upper rift highlighted in green. UR, Upper rift IAU, Intra-Alagoas Unconformity. of intraclastic grainstone beds described from cores that sampled the Gato do Mato ridge see Fig. 2 for location . At Libra, the margin stacking pattern within the Sag interval strongly varies laterally, between the three main sectors that sit on distinct basement blocks, indicating differential subsidence through the structure and impact of initial bathymetry on sequence development Fig. 12 . The mounded facies SF1 Table 1 are generally very subdued to the west and become progressively thicker and vertically stacked or even backstepped to the east over the central sector, suggesting significantly increased subsidence in that direction Minzoni et al. 2017 . Discussion Depositional model of presalt carbonate systems and lake palaeobathymetry The fundamental seismic-scale building block of the presalt carbonate system has a distinct sigmoidal shape Figs 8 10 , which records preferential carbonate sediment accumulation in shallow water over or around palaeohighs, where carbonate units are thicker, and a downward tapering of carbonate production and accumulation with water depth Fig. 14 . The lateral distribution of calibrated seismic facies within the sigmoidal building block indicates that shallow-water accumulation consisted of reworked spherulite or intraclastic grainstone and shrubby boundstone with local occurrence of microbial boundstone along the shelf margins, and spherulite packstone wackestone in areas protected from currents and waves Fig. 13 . Deposition in deeper water along the slopes consisted of spherulite grainstone to wackestone containing a progressively greater amount of finely laminated shale, which is the dominant lithofacies in basinal or profundal areas, away from the shelf margins Figs 14 15 . The shapes and dimensions of individual clinoforms can be used to empirically evaluate the bathymetry of the presalt lakes at time of carbonate deposition. The height of clinoforms in the Santos Basin varies between roughly 200 m and more than 800 m, with an average of circa 350 m. Erosional Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on January 12, 2021 Seismic architecture of lacustrine presalt carbonate systems Fig. 14. Interpreted sediment production and accumulation curve for the main Upper Barra Velha carbonate lithofacies. Note the general tapering with increasing water depth dotted line . and collapse slopes reach higher values but the measured height values in these types of slope are less reliable as a proxy for palaeobathymetry, because they may have been accentuated by later fault reactivation. Even if not corrected for differential compaction, these values attest that the presalt carbonate sediments were deposited on and around local highs within deep lacustrine basins. The occurrence of collapse features and corresponding chaotic, fan-shaped reflectors at the toe of the slope are interpreted as mass transport deposits Figs 4a, 5a, 6c, 8b 12c along major drop-offs. Perhaps more significantly, the local climbing downlap geometry of BVE100 reflectors onto elevated features of the underlying BVE200 interval corroborates the existence of a rugged topography and deep basins. During deposition of the BVE100, regional toplap geometries and margin downstepping indicate that accumulation of carbonate sediment had shifted from the shelf top to the slope. This series of forced regression events Figs 3 6 8 , albeit punctuated by minor aggradation of the margins, records significant and progressive shrinkage, partial desiccation of the lakes, and prolonged exposure of the platform tops. Well-preserved inclined reflectors at the base of the salt, however, indicate a final water depth of 150 m or greater, at least locally. These observations, based on calibrated seismic data, are in stark contrast with the flat and shallow lake model proposed by some workers Wright and Barnett 2017 Wright and Rodriguez 2018 , which is based on core analyses alone and rely upon a geochemical model for the precipitation of Mg-rich clay minerals stevensite Tosca and Wright 2015 Wright and Tosca 2016 Wright and Rodriguez 2018 . It is noteworthy, however, that the model proposed by Wright and co-authors dismisses the observation of clinoforms as geophysical artefacts or, more baffling, hinges on a regional flattening of the seismic images at the base of salt top carbonates , and assumes that lacustrine carbonate systems cannot produce thick accumulations of mounded features akin to those observed in marine systems. This assumption, however, is based on our current poorly defined models of lacustrine carbonate settings. Additionally, it should be noted that even when discounting internal prograding reflections within the Barra Velha as geophysical artefacts, the overall draping geometry of the BVE100-BVE200 would still imply significant bathymetry at the time of deposition. Furthermore, the Cretaceous presalt lakes differ greatly from both modern and ancient lacustrine analogues in terms of texture and thickness of carbonate deposits, water chemistry and size. Large and deep presalt lakes could have generated enough fetch, tides and storms to be more similar to ocean basins than our current lacustrine models Fig. 15. Schematic depositional model for the Upper Barra Velha interval and correlative seismic facies and lithofacies. MTDs, mass transport deposits. Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on January 12, 2021 M. Minzoni et al. predict. Perhaps a strong chemical stratification in the presalt lake waters could be invoked to explain both the abundant precipitation of Mg-rich clays such as stevensite and the occurrence of deep water. The local occurrence of clinoforms within the upper rift section supports a similar depositional model for the coquina Itapema Formation . Mounded facies SF1 Table 1 within the Itapema interval are relatively extensive and rooted onto the underlying topographic highs. They are interpreted as the production loci of the shell material that was either locally reworked into shoals or transported downslope to form prograding clinoform packages. Despite the apparent lack of boundstone in the Itapema, these clinoforms are comparable in size and dip angle with those observed in the Barra Velha Fig. 4 Barnett et al. 2020 . Steep slopes may have resulted from deposition of the coarse shell material at angle of repose, early cementation and stabilization of slope sediment, or both. The occurrence of large collapse and healed scars along the margins of Libra Fig. 4 suggests that early cementation may have played a role, at least locally. It is also important to note that progradation of the Itapema did not fill the basin and that the youngest clinoforms attained at least 350 m in height Fig. 4 , recording a very steep and rugged palaeotopography at time of initial deposition of the Barra Velha. A switch to shallow lakes across the PAU would not only imply a lake level drop of .350 m, but also a very prolonged exposure of the top and slope of the Itapema interval. Controls on sequence-stratigraphic architecture In marine settings the large-scale architecture of carbonate systems is controlled in first principle by the antecedent topography, the available accommodation and its lateral and vertical variation through time tectonic setting and the carbonate factory type e.g. Pomar 2001 Bosence 2005 Schlager 2005 Dorobek 2008 Minzoni et al. 2013 . The same first-order controls must operate in any type of sedimentary basin, including lacustrine systems, as long as there is sufficient supersaturation and precipitation of calcium carbonate, either biotically or abiotically. The main difference between lacustrine and marine systems of comparable size is the water chemistry and therefore the carbonate factory type Minzoni et al. 2017 Eberli et al. 2019 . Large lacustrine systems characterized by tapering saturation with water depth would therefore mimic marine systems, except for the details of the carbonate components and perhaps the high-frequency stratigraphic architecture. The stacking pattern of sigmoidal building blocks mapped in the presalt unit records the complex sequence stratigraphic architecture of lacustrine carbonate systems. The position of the shelf margin through time in prograding intervals of the BVE100 can be confidently correlated only locally, within major basement highs, suggesting that the lakes may have become locally isolated during times of lake-level fall and lowstand, rather than being a single continuous lake. By the same token, regional correlation of carbonate strata on depositional highs and intervening lows during the highstand periods indicates that the highstand lakes were deep, very continuous and probably areally comparable to oceanic basins. The stacking pattern of mounded marginal facies SF1 Table 1 across the IAU boundary shows the impact of subsidence and accommodation on architectural style Figs 3, 6 8 . Relatively rapid but laterally variable subsidence across rotating normal fault blocks produced aggradation and local backstepping of the marginal mounds in the Lower Barra Velha BVE300 interval. Reduced subsidence rates during thermal isostatic re-equilibration allowed significant progradation of the shelf margin in the Upper Barra Velha interval. Lateral variation in accommodation via differential subsidence at Libra resulted in varying stacking patterns, from progradation in the NW sector to aggradation and backstepping in the central sector Fig. 12 . Large-scale base-level variations recorded by vertical shifting of the margin of up to 200 m are the probable driver of higher-order sequences observed in the BVE100 interval Figs 6 8 . Similar variations may have occurred in the BVE200 and BVE300 as well, but the dominant aggradation pattern typical of these intervals makes it more difficult to resolve high-order sequences owing to the vertical stacking of the seismic facies. The antecedent topography inherited from multiphase rifting of the basement exerted an additional major control on the architecture and facies distribution in the presalt carbonate systems. Shallow basinal areas with limited accommodation are associated with greater progradation of generally gentler slopes and coalescence of smaller nuclei into larger megaplatforms Minzoni et al. 2017 Simo et al. 2019 . Faulted highs abutting deeper basinal areas and basement drop-offs in excess of 500 m are associated with lesser progradation, steeper slope angles and, in extreme cases, aggradation of fringing boundstone or grainstone mounds Fig. 11a and margin failure by sector collapse Figs 5a, 7b 12c . A clear example is recorded in the Sugar Loaf High, where carbonate strata of the Barra Velha deposited at the margins of a high-relief horst structure exhibit an aggradational pattern, with local backstepping Fig. 7 . Erosion and collapse of high-relief margins is particularly well expressed along the high-relief .1000 m , steep .30 southeastern boundary of Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on January 12, 2021 Seismic architecture of lacustrine presalt carbonate systems both the Sugar Loaf High and the Tupi High Figs 7b 11a , where large collapse scars, 3 5 km wide, caused deep erosion of the carbonate margin Buckley et al. 2015 Minzoni et al. 2017 Figs 2 13b . Time-equivalent strata deposited in significantly shallower water generally only up to 350 m along the margins of internal basins perched on the main structural highs are characterized by strongly prograding reflectors Figs 6 9 13c Tremblay et al. 2014 Buckley et al. 2015 Minzoni et al. 2017 . Similarly, progradation was more pronounced where basin infill occurred, which effectively decreased water depth and thus the relief of the carbonate margin. This is particularly evident in the area between the Sugar Loaf High and the Tupi High, where thick, basinal accumulation of volcanic rocks and volcanoclastic strata of the BVE300 was associated with later Upper Barra Velha progradation of the shelf margin Figs 3 8 . Sediment accumulation at the toe of slope also affected the geometry of the prograding clinoforms. Prograding reflectors over starved basinal areas are typically tabular, with steep, linear slopes Fig. 10b , while prograding reflections over areas of thick basinal accumulation display a characteristic climbing and flattening outward geometry Bosellini 1984 , and have a distinct exponential shape with tangential lower slope Adams and Kenter 2013 Figs 6, 7a 10a . Palaeowind direction and surface currents had a significant impact on facies distribution and largescale geometries as inferred from consistent asymmetries interpreted as windward leeward effects Fig. 9 . Palaeoclimatic models indicate southerly to southeasterly trade winds, resulting in windward margins facing south and SE and leeward, progradational margins facing north and NW. The complex topography, however, may have affected significantly the current direction, at least locally. Sheltered versus open circulation could also result from the presence or absence, respectively, of persistently exposed features such as islands Fig. 11 , or simply by slight variations in water depth at the lake floor. The presence of islands along the southeastern margin of the Tupi High is confirmed by onlapping of top Barra Velha reflectors on both sides of the palaeohigh Fig. 11a . Wells that penetrated the sheltered, vast and shallow area leeward west of the island encountered a significantly greater proportion of fine-grained, microporous, Mg-clay-rich lithologies than the few that tested the windward side east of the island, where sheltering was not effective Fig. 11 . Removal of the Mg-clay, however, may have also occurred diagenetically, at least in part Tosca and Wright 2015 Wright and Barnett 2015 Wright and Rodriguez 2018 . The concave arcuate geometry in plan-view of prograding clinoforms within embayments Fig. 13 suggests that significant lateral transport of carbonate particles by drift currents may have occurred Tremblay et al. 2014 Minzoni et al. 2017 . Arcuate accretion of beach ridges is reported from coastal marine environments as well as large lakes. Lake Michigan accumulated up to 5 km of arcuate strand plain sediments in 3000 years Thompson and Baedke 1997 . Although the arcuate prograding wedges in the Upper Barra Velha interval are similar in geometry and shape to the ones described from modern lakes, the vertical dimension of the clinoforms up to 300 m is much larger in the presalt section, attesting to significantly deeper lakes and perhaps stronger storm activity. Conclusions Despite their peculiar petrographic and textural composition, the presalt lacustrine carbonate intervals of the Santos Basin show all of the salient large-scale sequence-stratigraphic characteristics known and described from marine carbonate systems developed in both active and passive tectonic settings. Synrift and post-rift carbonate systems in the Santos Basin are characterized by complex stratigraphy. The large-scale architecture as interpreted from calibrated seismic data was controlled primarily by subsidence patterns, antecedent topography and the production curve of the carbonate factory. The spatial and temporal accumulation pattern of basinal siliciclastic and volcanic strata contributed to the determination of progradation versus aggradation geometries and controlled the shape of the slope by modifying the platform relief. High-amplitude baselevel fluctuations modified but did not dramatically alter the basic architectural evolution of the carbonate systems. Shelf margins aggraded and backstepped during rifting atop horst structures or tilted basement blocks, where asymmetric evolution of the platform resulted from active rotation of the underlying basement. The depositional architecture of carbonate margins off the structural highs during the sag phase, when thermal, post-rift subsidence prevailed, is strongly progradational to downstepping, reflecting lower subsidence rates and perhaps increased production rates. Widespread downstepping in the Upper Barra Velha suggests exposure, and possibly erosion, of the shelf top prior to deposition of the salt. The sigmoidal geometry of the individual sequences indicates a tapering production with water depth, similar to that described from marine analogues. The steepness and size of inclined reflections, interpreted as slope deposits, imply that water depth was significant, up to several hundred metres, and the occurrence of arcuate strand plain beach Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on January 12, 2021 M. Minzoni et al. ridges suggests that storms and possibly deep-water currents exerted an important role in sediment reworking and accumulation. In contrast to previous core-based depositional models advocating a shallow and flat lake bottom bathymetry, evidence from calibrated seismic data indicates that the presalt lakes were deep and wide, at least episodically, and that the distribution of depositional facies both laterally and along the shelf profile was controlled by energy of the environment, regardless of the specific type of carbonate producer. This study shows that predicting reservoir quality distribution in the presalt carbonate play and analogue systems requires process-based conceptual models incorporating a detailed understanding of the factors controlling the sequence stratigraphic architecture and lateral facies distribution. Acknowledgments We wish to thank the Shell PreSalt Brasil Growth Team, Shell Specialized Geology Team Netherlands and Brasil Subsurface Technology for extensive collaboration and technical support. Interpretation was carried out under the auspices of Fred Keller, Gary Steffens, Peter Winefield, Jurriaan Reijs, Lucio Prevatti, Joris Grimbergen, Vanessa Kertznus, Barnaby Philps and Gabriel Guerra Shell . We also thank the Libra JV composed by PETROBRAS, CNPC, CNOOC Limited, TOTAL, Shell Brasil Petroleo and Pre -Sal Petro leo SA PPSA as manager of the Production Sharing Agreement for allowing the publication. Particular thanks to Rudolf Van Den Oord from Front End Development team in Shell. We thank CGG Veritas for permission to publish their seismic data all seismic images are from the CGG PSDM Cluster 3D volume and Libra. We are grateful to Volume Editor David Hunt, Coordinating Editor James Hendry and two anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and edits that improved the manuscript. Author contributions MM conceptualization lead , data curation equal , formal analysis lead , investigation lead , methodology lead , project administration equal , supervision equal , validation lead , visualization lead , writing original draft lead , writing review editing lead AC conceptualization equal , data curation equal , formal analysis equal , investigation equal , methodology equal , project administration equal , validation equal JT data curation supporting , formal analysis supporting , investigation supporting BW conceptualization supporting , project administration equal , resources equal , supervision supporting , writing review editing supporting . Funding This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. Data availability The datasets analysed during the current study are not publicly available due to their proprietary nature. References Adams, E.W. and Kenter, J.A.M. 2013. So diferente, yet so similar comparing and contrasting siliciclastic and carbonate slopes. In Verwer, K., Playton, T.E. and Harris, P.M. eds Deposits, Architecture and Controls of Carbonate Margin, Slope and Basinal Settings. SEPM Special Publications, 105, 14 25. Arienti, L.M., Souza, R.S. et al. 2018. Facies association, depositional systems, and paleophysiographic models of the Barra Velha Formation, Pre-Salt Sequence Santos Basin, Brazil. AAPG Search and Discovery, article no. 90323. Bachtel, S.L., Kissling, R.D., Martono, D., Rahardjanto, S.P., Dunn, P.A. and MacDonald, B.A. 2004. Seismic stratigraphic evolution of the Miocene Pliocene Segitiga Platform, East Natuna Sea, Indonesia the origin, growth, and demise of an isolated carbonate platform. In Eberli, G.P., Masaferro, J.L. and Sarg, J.F. eds Seismic Imaging of Carbonate Reservoirs and Systems. AAPG Memoirs, 81, 309 328. Barnett, A.J., Fu, L., Rapasi, T., Scotellaro, C., Guha, J., Cabolova, A. and Domingues, A.L. 2020. Seismic characterisation and origin of clinoforms in lacustrine depositional environments a case study from the Cretaceous of the South Atlantic. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 509. Bastianini, L., Rogerson, M., Mercedes-Marti n, R., Prior, T.J., Cesar, E.A. and Mayes, W.M. 2019. What causes carbonates to form shrubby morphologies An Antropocene limestone case study. Frontiers in Earth Sciences, 7, 1 19, https doi.org 10.3389 feart.2019.00236 Bosellini, A. 1984. Progradation geometries of carbonate platforms examples from the Triassic of the Dolomites, northern Italy. Sedimentology, 31, 1 24, https doi. org 10.1111 j.1365-3091.1984.tb00720.x Bosence, D.W.J. 2005. A genetic classification of carbonate platforms based on their basinal and tectonic settings in the Cenozoic. Sedimentary Geology, 175, 49 72, https doi.org 10.1016 j.sedgeo.2004.12.030 Buckley, J.P., Bosence, D.W.J. and Elders, C. 2015. Tectonic setting and stratigraphic architecture of an Early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonate platform, Sugar Loaf High, Santos Basin, Brazil. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 418, 175 191, https doi. org 10.1144 SP418.13 Carminatti, M., Wolff, B. and Gamboa, L.A.P. 2008. New exploratory frontiers in Brazil. 19th World Petroleum Congress, Madrid, 29 June to 3 July 2008. Carminatti, M., Dias, J.L. and Wolff, B. 2009. From turbidites to carbonates breaking paradigms in deep waters. Offshore Technology Conference, Houston, Texas, 20124. Catuneanu, O., Abreu, V. et al. 2009. Towards the standardization of sequence stratigraphy. Earth Science Review, 92, 1 33, https doi.org 10.1016 j.ear scirev.2008.10.003 Ceraldi, T.S. and Green, D. 2017. Evolution of the South Atlantic lacustrine deposits in response to Early Cretaceous rifting, subsidence and lake hydrology. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 438, 77 98, https doi.org 10.1144 SP438.10 Davison, I. 2007. Geology and tectonics of the south Atlantic Brazilian salt basins. Geological Society, London, Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on January 12, 2021 Seismic architecture of lacustrine presalt carbonate systems Special Publications, 272, 345 359, https doi.org 10.1144 GSL.SP.2007.272.01.18 Della Porta, G. 2015. Carbonate build-ups in lacustrine, hydrothermal and fluvial settings comparing depositional geometry, fabric types and geochemical signature. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 418, 17 68, https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.4 Della Porta, G., Merino-Tome, O., Kenter, J.A.M. and Verwer, K. 2013. Lower Jurassic microbial and skeletal carbonate factories and platform geometry Djebel Bou Dahar, High Atles, Morocco . In Verwer, K., Playton, T.E. and Harris, P.M. eds Deposits, Architecture and Controls of Carbonate Margin, Slope and Basinal Settings. SEPM Special Publications, 105, 237 263. De Luca, P., Carballo, J., Filgueiras, A., Pimentel, G., Esteban, M., Tritlla, J. and Villacorta, R. 2015. What is the role of volcanic rocks in the Brazilian Pre-Salt Extended abstracts. 77th EAGE Conference Exhibition, IFEMA, Madrid, Spain, 1 4 June 2015, https doi.org 10.3997 2214-4609.201412890 Dias, J.L. 2005. Tecto nica, estratigrafia e sedimentac a o no Andar Aptiano da margem leste brasileira. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobra s, 13, 7 25. Dorobek, S.L. 2008. Tectonic and depositional controls on syn-rift carbonate platform sedimentation. In Lukasik, J.A. and Simo, J.A. Toni eds Controls on Carbonate Platform and Reef Development. SEPM Special Publications, 89, 57 81. Eberli, G.P. and Ginsburg, R.N. 1987. Segmentation and coalescence of Cenozoic carbonate platforms, northwestern Great Bahama Bank. Geology, 15, 75 79, https doi.org 10.1130 0091-7613 1987 15,75 SA COCC.2.0.CO 2 Eberli, G.P., Sousaari, E., Karaca, E., Diaz, M., Betzler, C. and Ludmann, T. 2019. Lessons from Hamelin Pool and the Maldives for the coquina reservoir in Libra, Santos Basin. Abstracts. AAPG Annual Meeting ACE , San Antonio, TX. Fairhead, J.D. and Wilson, W. 2005. Plate tectonic processes in the South Atlantic Ocean do we need deep mantle plumes In Fougler, G.R., Natland, J.H., Presnall, D.C. and Anderson, D.L. eds Plate, Plumes, and Paradigms. Geological Society of America, Special Papers, 388, 537 553. Galloway, W.E. 1989. Genetic stratigraphic sequences in basin analysis 1 architecture and genesis of floodingsurface-bounded depositional units. AAPG Bulletin, 73, 125 142. Goodfriend, G.A. and Stanley, D.J. 1999. Rapid strandplain accretion in the northeastern Nile delta in the 9th century A.D. and the demise of the port of Pelusium. Geology, 27, 147 150. Guardado, L.R., Gamboa, L.A.P. and Lucchesi, C.F. 1990. Petroleum geology of the Campos Basin, Brazil a model for producing Atlantic-type basins. In Edwards, J.D. and Santogrossi, P.A. eds Divergent-passive margin basins. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Memoirs, 48, 3 80. Kattah, S. 2017. Exploration opportunities in the Pre-Salt play, Deepwater Campos Basin, Brazil. The Sedimentary Record, 15, 4 8, https doi.org 10.2110 sedred.2017.1.4 Lehrmann, D.J., Minzoni, M. et al. 2020. Giant sectorcollapse structures scalloped margins of the Yangtze Platform and Great Bank of Guizhou, China implications for genesis of collapsed carbonate platform margin systems. Sedimentology, 67, https doi.org 10. 1111 sed.12740 Liechoscki de Paula Faria, D., Tadeu dos Reis, A. and Gomes de Souza, O., JR. 2017. Three-dimensional stratigraphic-sedimentological forward modelling of an Aptian carbonate reservoir deposited during the sag stage in the Santos basin, Brazil. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 88, 676 695, https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2017.09.013 Lomask, J., Francis, J.M., Rickett, J., Buursink, M.L., Gerber, T.P., Perlmutter, M. and Paola, C. 2009. New tools for seismic stratigraphic interpretation stratal convergence and instantaneous isochron attribute cubes derived from volumetric flattening of experimental strata. AAPG Bulletin, 93, 453 459, https doi.org 10.1306 11200808104 Mello, M.R., Macedo, J.M., Requejo, R. and Schiefelbein, C. 2002. The Great Campos a frontier for new giant hydrocarbon accummulations in the Brazilian sedimentary basins. Abstract. AAPG Bulletin, 85, 13, https doi.org 10.1306 61EEC78E-173E-11D7-8645 000102C1865D Mercedes-Marti n, R., Brasier, A.T., Rogerson, M., Reijmer, J.J.G., Vonhof, H. and Pedley, M. 2017. A depositional model for spherulitic carbonates associated with alkaline, volcanic lakes. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 86, 168 191, https doi.org 10. 1016 j.marpetgeo.2017.05.032 Mercedes-Marti n, R., Ayora, C., Tritlla, J. and SanchezRoman, M. 2019. The hydrochemical evolution of alkaline volcanic lakes a model to understand the South Atlantic pre-salt mineral assemblages. Earth-Science Reviews, 198, 1 19, https doi.org 10.1016 j.ear scirev.2019.102938 Minzoni, M., Lehrmann, D.J. et al. 2013. Triassic tank platform margin and slope architecture in space and time, Nanpanjiang Basin, south China. In Verwer, K., Playton, T.E. and Harris, P.M. eds Deposits, Architecture and Controls of Carbonate Margin, Slope and Basinal Settings. SEPM Special Publications, 105, 84 113. Minzoni, M., Cantelli, A. and Thornton, J. 2017. Seismicscale geometries and sequence-stratigraphic architecture of Early Cretaceous sun-post rift lacustrine carbonate systems, pre-salt section, South Atlantic margins. In Hart, B., Rosen, N.C., West, D., D Agostino, A., Messina, C., Hoffman, M. and Wild, R. eds Sequence Stratigraphy The Future Defined. SEPM Gulf Coast Section Publications, https doi.org 10.5724 gcs.17. 193 Mitchum, R.M., JR. and Van Wagoner, J.C. 1991. Highfrequency sequences and their stacking patterns sequence-stratigraphic evidence of high-frequency eustatic cycles. Sedimentary Geology, 70, 131 160, https doi.org 10.1016 0037-0738 91 90139-5 Mitchum, R.M., JR, Vail, P.R. and Sangree, J.B. 1977. Seismic stratigraphy and global change of sea level, part 6 stratigraphic interpretation of seismic reflection patterns in depositional sequences. In Payton, C.E. ed. Seismic Stratigraphy Application to Hydrocarbon Exploration. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Memoirs, 26, 117 133. Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on January 12, 2021 M. Minzoni et al. Moreira, J.L.P., Valdetaro Madeira, C.V., Gil, J.A. and Machado, M.A.P. 2007. Bacia de Santos. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, 15, 531 549. Muniz, M.C. and Bosence, D.W. 2015. Pre-salt microbialites from the Campos Basin offshore Brazil image log facies, facies model and cyclicity in lacustrine carbonates. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 418, 221 242, https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.10 Pereira, M.J. and Feijo , F.J. 1994. Bacia de Santos. Estratigrafia das Bacias Sedimentares do Brasil. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobra s, 8, 219 234. Pietzsch, R., Oliveira, D.M. et al. 2018. Palaeohydrology of the Lower Cretaceous pre-salt lacustrine system, from rift to post-rift phase, Santos Basin, Brazil. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, 507, 60 80, https doi.org 10.1016 j.palaeo.2018.06.043 Playton, T.E., Janson, X. and Kerans, C. 2010. Carbonate slopes. Facies Models, 4, 449 476. Pomar, L. 2001. Types of carbonate platforms a genetic approach. Basin Research, 13, 313 334, https doi. org 10.1046 j.0950-091x.2001.00152.x Rezende, M.F. and Pope, M.C. 2015. Importance of depositional texture in pore characterization of subsalt microbialite carbonates, offshore Brazil. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 418, 193 207, https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.2 Saller, A., Rushton, S., Buambua, L., Inman, K., McNeil, R. and Dickson, J.T. 2016. Presalt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola. AAPG Bulletin, 100, 1135 1164, https doi. org 10.1306 02111615216 Schlager, W. 1989. Drowning unconformities on carbonate platforms. In Crevello, P.D., Sarg, J.F., Read, J.F. and Wilson, J.L. eds Controls on Carbonate Platform to Basin Development. SEPM Special Publications, 44, 15 25. Schlager, W. 2005. Carbonate sedimentology and sequence stratigraphy. SEPM Special Publications, 8, https doi.org 10.2110 csp.05.08 Simo, T., Sitgreaves, J., Smith, E., Bayram, U. and Stewart, J. 2019. Styles of pre-salt carbonate platforms, Brazil Santos Basin. AAPG Search and Discovery, article no. 90350. Souza, R.S., Arienti, L.M. et al. 2018. Petrology of the hydrothermal and evaporitic continental Cretaceous Aptian pre-salt carbonates and associated rocks, South Atlantic Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. Abstract. AAPG Search and Discovery, article no. 90323. Thompson, T.A. and Baedke, S.J. 1997. Strand-plain evidence for late Holocene lake-level variations in Lake Michigan. Geological Society of America, Bulletin, 109, 666 682, https doi.org 10.1130 0016-7606 1997 109,0666 SPEFLH.2.3.CO 2 Tosca, N.J. and Wright, V.P. 2015. Diagenetic pathways linked to labile Mg-clays in lacustrine carbonate reservoirs a model for the origin of secondary porosity in the Cretaceous pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, offshore Brazil. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 435, 36 46, https doi.org 10.1144 SP435.1 Tremblay, S., Verwer, K. and Lukasik, J. 2014. New insight into the seismic architecture of the pre-salt upper sag carbonate depositional system, Brazil. Abstract. AAPG Search and Discovery, article no. 90189. Vail, P.R. 1987. Seismic stratigraphy interpretation using sequence stratigraphy. Part 1 seismic stratigraphy interpretation procedure. In Balley, A.W. ed. Atlas of Seismic Stratigraphy. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Studies in Geology, 27, 1 10. Van Hoek, T., Gesbert, S. and Pickens, J. 2010. Geometric attributes for seismic stratigraphic interpretation. The Leading Edge, 29, 1056 1065, https doi.org 10. 1190 1.3485766 Winter, W.R., Jahnert, R.J. and Franc a, A.B. 2007. Bacia de Campos. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, 15, 511 529. Wright, V.P. 2010 Reservoir architectures in non-marine carbonates abs. . AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition, 10-13 April, Houston, Texas, USA. Search and Discovery Article 40801. Wright, V.P. 2012. Lacustrine carbonates in rift settings the interaction of volcanic and microbial processes on carbonate deposition. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 370, 39 47, https doi.org 10. 1144 SP370.2 Wright, V.P. and Barnett, A.J. 2015. An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 418, 209 219, https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.3 Wright, V.P. and Barnett, A.J. 2017. Critically evaluating the current depositional models for the pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, offshore Brazil. Abstract. AAPG Search and Discovery, article no. 51439 2017 . Wright, V.P. and Rodriguez, K. 2018. Reinterpreting the South Atlantic pre-salt microbialite reservoirs petrographic, isotopic and seismic evidence for a shallow evaporitic lake depositional model. First Break, 36, 71 77. Wright, V.P. and Tosca, N.J. 2016. A geochemical model for the formation of the pre-salt reservoirs, Santos Basin, Brazil implications for understanding reservoir distribution. AAPG Search and Discovery, article no. 51304.

[END_OF_PAPER]

Seismic Interpretation of presalt carbonate reservoirs of the Bu zios Field, Santos Basin Pedro Henrique Cunha de Macedo1, , De bora Ribeiro Barretto1, Igor de Andrade Neves1, Francisco Rome rio Abrantes Junior1, Wagner Moreira Lupinacci1 1Exploratory Interpretation and Reservoir Characterization Group GIECAR , Department of Geology and Geophysics, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Nitero i, RJ,Brazil Copyright 2021, SBGf-Sociedade Brasileira de Geofi sica th This paper was prepared for presentation during the 17 International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,16-19August 2021. Contents of this paper were reviewed by the Technical Committee of the 17th International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society and do not necessarily represent any position of the SBGf, its officers or members. Electronic reproduction or storage of any part of this paper for commercial purposes without the written consent of the Brazilian Geophysical Society is prohibited. Abstract The Brazilian presalt carbonate reservoirs are one of the most requested places for oil and gas industry exploration due to its production capacity. Oil and gas companies are often taking place to collect information about geology and the reservoirs characteristics, to consequently improve production results. Seismic interpretation is mandatory to understand the geology, always thinking about reducing all the risks during exploration. Seismic and well data are commonly used together as a way to comprehend geological history and provide a good reservoir characterization. In this paper, we performed the seismic interpretation on presalt carbonate reservoirs of Bu zios Field within the isopach maps strategy and TecVA attribute. As results we achieved better definition of faults distribution and tectonics behavior, determined the main interval thickness and the possibility of coquina banks occurrence. Introduction Formation. Both formations are important presalt exploration targets and have quite different sedimentarytectonic contexts. The objective of this work is to understand the evolution of the rift and sag phases in the Bu zios Field area, through the integration of well and seismic data. This article intends to collaborate for a better understanding of the paleoenvironments of the Itapema and Barra Velha formations. We interpreted four important unconformities in the presalt zone i Economic basement ii Jiquia -Buracica unconformity separates Pic arras from Itapema Formations iii Pre -Alagoas unconformity the top of coquina deposits and acts dividing the Itapema from Lower Barra Velha Formations and iv the Base of Salt. Geological Setting The Santos Basin is located on the southeastern Brazilian margin, bounded by the Campos Basin at the North, and the Pelotas Basin at the South. Santos Basin is one of the most extensive offshore Brazilian basins, with an area of 352,000 km2, and a current water depth of up to 3,000 m. The main structural features are the Cabo Frio High to the Northeast and the Floriano polis Platform to the Southwest, the Santos hinge line to the west, which marks the external western limit of the salt Ariri Formation , and the Sa o Paulo plateau to the East. The Bu zios Field is located at the Santos Basin Figure 1 . The Santos Basin represents the largest presalt exploration and production area in Brazil. It currently accounts for more than 70 of the country s oil and gas production ANP, 2021 . In this context, the Bu zios Field is considered a super-giant field with an estimated volume in place of 3,058 million bbl of oil equivalent and, in January 2021, the outstanding result of 146,524 Bbl d was achieved by the platform with the highest oil production in the country located in Bu zios Field. The carbonate sedimentation processes are extremely sensitive to climatic factors, hydrodynamics, basin tectonics and morphology. These differences might cause vertical and lateral heterogeneity effects in seismic facies Porta, 2015 . In the Santos Basin, the main reservoirs are found inner coquinas a type of sedimentary rock composed mainly by shells and their fragments of the Itapema Formation Castro, 2019 and in the spherulitic, laminate, shrubs and reworked facies of the Barra Velha Formation Gomes et al., 2020 . Castro 2019 showed that the Itapema Formation in the Bu zios Field is less influenced by the presence of fines and has better permeabilities than the Barra Velha Figure 1 - Bu zios Field Location adapted from ANP, 2016 . According to Moreira et al. 2007 , the geological history of the Santos Basin can be divided into three phases Rift, Post-rift and Drift. The Rift phase presents extension efforts of separation between the South American and African plates, which started from the Lower Cretaceous. Muniz and Bosence 2015 describe that the sequence of tectonic events that caused the fragmentation of Gondwana would have started from the stretching and thinning process of the continental crust, triggering a Seventeenth International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society SEISMIC INTERPRETATION IN PRESALT RESERVOIRS 2 rifting process. This fragmentation consisted of a mixed process controlled by lithospheric stretching and thermal anomalies. The crystalline basement of the Santos Basin, generated in the context of Gondwana s amalgamation, is characterized by granites and gneisses of pre-Cambrian age of the Coastal Complex and metasediments of the Ribeira Strip Moreira et al., 2007 . During the main rifting process, around 145 Ma, the Northwest portion remained closed while a wedge was extended to the south, along the east of South America Szatmari and Milani, 2016 . According to the authors, volcanism would have been absent where the lithosphere was thick. An important consequence during the Rift Phase was the space-forming mechanism for sedimentary accommodation in an extensional tectonic setting, and widespread normal faults generation due to mechanical subsidence process besides causing reactivation of faults in the Precambrian basement Mohriak, 2008 . Strugale et al. 2021 point out that the different basement compositions represent another determining factor for the way the rifting process takes place. Where the basement is heterogeneous, the pre-existing fabric was reactivated whenever its orientation was favorable, producing faults as the extension direction rotates, whereas low to very low angle basement fabric were cross-cut by rift faults. Where the basement was homogeneous and more stable, only the previous formed faults remain active throughout the rifting. Another effect observed was the contribution and influence of thermal anomalies in the region of the Santos Basin, which would have been responsible for inducing the strain softening process since the beginning of the rift, leading to the development of uplifted areas ANP LEBAC, 2003 . The importance of understanding the different processes related to the rifting phase is the influence during the deposition of the overlying sedimentary layers. The rift super-sequence is composed of continental siliciclastics, talc-stevensite ooids with interbedded lacustrine coquinas and organic-rich shales of the Pic arras and Itapema formations, consisting of essentially continental sediments Szatmari and Milani, 2016 . Furthermore, during the Rift Phase, the sediments from the bottom of the Barra Velha Formation were deposited Buckley et al., 2015 . These deposits show a prominent wedge geometry, which may represent differences in the faults movement rate that consequently created space for accommodation. Thus, they state that this may represent an increase in the sedimentation rate at the top of the Barra Velha Formation when compared to the Pic arras and Itapema formations. The post-rift sequence, also known as the sag phase, is represented by the Upper Barra Velha Formation, which is characterized by shrubs, spherulite, laminate and reworked facies Gomes et al., 2020 precipitated nonmarine carbonate successions Wright Barnett 2015 .The absence of unambiguous palaeoecologically significant fossils, together with the presence of the mineral stevensite rather than marine-derived evaporates sulphates and chlorides , indicates an alkaline lacustrine setting with a volcanic source area Wright Barnett 2015 . In short, the presalt reservoir rocks are in the Itapema and Barra Velha formations. The Itapema Formation is represented by grainstones to bivalves coquinas , wackestones and bioclastic packstones, carbonate shales and dark shales, rich in organic matter, which sometimes also work as source rocks. The Barra Velha Formation is composed of carbonates deposited in lacustrine environment with a multiplicity of facies from boundstones and grainstones to mudstones. The Itapema Formation is limited at the bottom by the Jiquia Buracica unconformity 126.4 Ma and at the top by the Pre -Alagoas unconformity, while the Barra Velha Formation is limited at the bottom by the Pre Alagoas unconformity and at the top by the Base of Salt Moreira et al. 2007 . Seismic Interpretation The seismic data provides information about the regional context, depositional system, tectonic history and allows inferring geological features and heterogeneities, favoring better understanding of sedimentary basins. The interpretation of seismic reflection terminations, such as onlap, downlap, toplap and erosive truncations, are the main criteria for the recognition of stratigraphic units Figure 2 . They are essential to better understand what happened, allowing to foresee the current geological behavior. Then, the identification of seismic parameters was made to recognize information about the depositional environment, source of sediments and the geological context, in which the seismic facies were deposited. For this study, we used a PSDM volume post-stacked depth migration and applied a structural smoothing filter to remove part of migration smile noises. Data from 15 wells Figure 3 helped in the seismic interpretation from the identification of the boundaries between the lithostratigraphic units. Previous works were also fundamental for a better understanding of the sedimentary-tectonic history of the study area. Seventeenth International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society MACEDO, BARRETTO, NEVES, ABRANTES JR. LUPINACCI 3 Figure 2 - Section AA . Schematic stratigraphic sequences and the angular relationships defining the boundaries of stratigraphic units. possible erosion, especially in the region at east of the F1 fault, which caused a strong slope in the strata. We also visualized the amount of onlap markings in yellow , present mainly in the region of a build-up, to the east the horizontal strata that end in an inclined surface, being in this case a possible build-up. This onlap configuration is very present in places with faults that were generated during the rifting process, which has influence on the formation of accommodation space and generation of wedges in the synrift interval red and light blue arrows, Figure 2 . Figure 3 - Grid of the Base of Salt - Bu zios Field. Wells in black dots. AA is the interpreted crossline. In carbonate rocks, due to the high heterogeneity of these rocks, the integration of well and seismic data is essential for the reservoir characterization. The steps used to develop this work are shown in Figure 4. Figure 4 - Workflow used in this work. We recognize on Figure 2 the erosional truncations in blue as reflectors that end on an upper surface, results of We interpreted the Economic Basement as a high amplitude reflector due to the high amplitude contrast of the basalts with the siliciclastic deposits of the Pic arras Fm. The TecVA attribute Bulho es and Amorim, 2005 helped during the interpretation of the basement. This attribute was co-rendering with the seismic amplitude and allowed to improve the characterization of the seismic facies below the basement, which is characterized as chaotic of low amplitude. In addition, TecVa also highlighted the faults of the presalt section Figure 5-b . The typical pattern of the basement is the absence of internal reflections or the presence of chaotic reflections. We noticed that the presalt interval in the Bu zios Field has horst-graben systems, characteristic of extensional basins Figure 6 . The faults are very consistent along the entire rift. These two aspects have influence on geological sedimentation and the faults might act as fluid conductors throughout the sections. In the study area, the fault orientation is N-S and can reach up to 2 km of reject. In the syn-rift segment, we observed medium to low amplitude reflectors, with subparallel and wavy configurations of medium continuity and low frequency, representing deposits of clastic sediments of the Pic arras Formation. The next unconformity interpreted was Jiquia Buracica, to delimitate the lower Itapema Formation. The coquinas have been interpreted as lacustrine deposits located at structural highs, deposited under shallow and high-energy conditions Figure 6 . The Itapema Formation presented progradational to chaotic seismic facies during Seventeenth International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society SEISMIC INTERPRETATION IN PRESALT RESERVOIRS 4 seismic interpretation. Debris flow were also identified according to seismic reflection terminations added to the amplitude information, possible result of the fragmented configuration due to rifting process. In the Pre -Alagoas unconformity interpretation, it was possible to observe higher amplitudes within planeparallel seismic facies. The Barra Velha Formation is also subdivided into upper and lower Barra Velha, where the lower one is affected by a rifting characteristic tectonic regime and is described by reworked facies, with rudstones and grainstones being the prevailing facies Silva et al., 2014 . The upper one, beneath the salt, shows a predominance of flat arrangement in situ facies, portraying a sag phase tectonic quiescence . Because of this aspect, the layers are displayed stable. We recognized the transition between lake bottom patterns of the upper rift phase passing upward to aggradational progradational carbonate platform during the sag phase, indicating distal facies at the base of the sequence, which can be attributed to the fault development in the region during the Barra Velha Formation. It is possible to visualize in the Figure 6 that the coquina bank is limited by two normal faults, F1 and F2, sectioning the coquina bank in the central part of a structural high. As can be seen between faults F2 and F3 Figure 6 , the thickness of the Barra Velha Formation was increased, which was caused by the faulting and horst and graben configuration especially in high regions . We point out this effect as accommodation space creation. The Sag phase is assigned as a period of tectonic quiescence. However, we can notice faults that reach the Base of Salt Figure 6 , leading to the discussion about the presence of some tectonic activity in this period. Figure 5 - Original Seismic A and TecVA attribute B . Economic basement interpreted in red. Figure 6 - Seismic section through Bu zios Field, with unconformities and faults interpretation. F1, F2, F3 represent important faults. F1-F2 act compartmentalizing the coquina bank, highlighted in light blue. F1 and F3 show their extension till the base of salt. It is also possible to recognize a build-up at the East and a Horst-Graben configuration. Seventeenth International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society MACEDO, BARRETTO, NEVES, ABRANTES JR. LUPINACCI 5 We identified the following seismic patterns during interpretation Carbonate build-ups probably controlled by hydrothermal activity at the edge of high structural faults and isolated at high locations. Facies of platform carbonate sedimentation controlled by topography and bathymetry, presenting aggradational or progradational character. Extensive carbonate parallel architecture. Debris flow to the right of F3 , correlated to the tectonics. platforms with plane- The carbonate mounds are often recognized presenting an internal low-amplitude reflectors behavior, with great possibility to be an excellent reservoir Jesus et al. 2019 Ferreira et al. 2021 . The build-ups display aggradational geometries that are onlapped and overlain by evaporates Figure 2 . Above the Barra Velha Formation, during the Neoaptian, the evaporites of the Ariri Formation were deposited. The base of the salt has a high amplitude characteristic and acts as the hydrocarbon seal at the region. Isopachs An isopach map provides information on a geological horizon, while combined with other geological information, enables the geologist to interpret the activity and the history of this layer and its time segment. An isopach map focuses on a special horizon and allows thickness analysis. Based on the isopach maps Figure 7 , we analyzed the thickness of each reservoir interval, Itapema and Barra Velha formations, and thus better understand their deposition phases over time, which is characterized as an important step for future modeling. To the southeast, we see a thickness increase of the Barra Velha Formation Figure 7a , with mounds improving permoporous characteristics, due to the large dip-slip faults. At this location, the creation of accommodation space was very high. The Figure 7b displays a thickness increase at the central part of Itapema Formation, at the same place where was possible to observe coquina bank restricted to the highs between the main faults. Szatmari and Milani 2016 also point out that there is an increase in the occurrence of oil reserves at the south of Santos Basin. According to the authors, the main reasons for this are the increase of generator rocks amount to the south with the widening and deepening of the rift. This increase was displayed in Figure 7. Conclusions i Evidence of faults affecting the upper rift and sag sections in the location of section AA indicates that tectonic activity is at least locally controlling the sag phase sedimentation in some segments of the Bu zios Field. ii Coquinas with good permoporous properties towards the top of Itapema Formation are also associated with structural highs, influenced by faults acting as controllers. iii The thickness of the Barra Velha Formation increases along the section due to geological behavior and tectonic activity. We observe that the greatest thickness of the reservoir interval is located on the structural highs of the rift phase, indicating more favorable environmental conditions for the development of carbonate facies. Figure 7- Isopachs showing the thicknesses of Barra Velha a and Itapema b Formations. AA is the seismic section and X point at the Barra Velha isopach map a displays a thickness increase, with mounds possibly improving permoporous characteristics, due to the large dip-slip faults. The red circle on b displays the interpreted coquina bank in Itapema Formation. Seventeenth International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society SEISMIC INTERPRETATION IN PRESALT RESERVOIRS 6 Acknowledgments The authors thank ANP for providing the used data and Emerson E P for providing support and software license. MOREIRA, J. L. P. MADEIRA, C. V. GIL, J. A. MACHADO, M. A. P., 2007, Bacia de Santos Boletim de Geocie nciasda Petrobras, v. 15, no. 2, p. 531 550. References MOHRIAK, W. NEMCOK, M. ENCISO, G. 2008. South Atlantic divergent margin evolution rift-border uplift and salt tectonics in the basins of SE Brazil. 294. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 365 398. ANP. 2021. Boletim da Produc a o de Petro leo e Ga s Natural. Superintende ncia de Desenvolvimento e Produc a o, jan. 2021. CHINELATTO, G. F. BELILA, A. M. P BASSO, M. SOUZA, J. P. P. VIDAL, A. C. 2020. A taphofacies interpretation of shell concentrations and their relationship with petrophysics A case study of Barremian-Aptian coquinas in the Itapema Formation, Santos Basin-Brazil. Marine and Petroleum Geology 116 104317. . BASILE, C. MONTEVERDE, D. Bedding attitudes as a sequence stratigraphy proxy A case study from borehole images, Integrated Ocean Drilling Program Leg 313, Hole M28. Geosphere, Geological Society of America, 2012, 10 2 , pp.207-220. CASTRO, T. M. 2019. Avaliac a o dos reservato rios carbona ticos do pre -sal no Campo de Bu zios, Bacia de Santos. Dissertac a o Mestrado em Dina mica dos Oceanos e Terra - UFF. FERREIRA, D. J. A. LUPINACCI, W. M. NEVES, I. A. ZAMBRINI, J. P. R. FERRARI, A. L. GAMBOA L. A. P. 2019 . Unsupervised seismic facies classification applied to a presalt carbonate reservoir, Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. AAPG Bulletin, 103 4 , 997 1012. GOMES, J. P. BUNEVICH, R. B. TEDESCHI, L. R. TUCKER, M. E. WHITAKER, F. F. 2020 . Facies classification and patterns of lacustrine carbonate deposition of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazilian Presalt. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 104176. PORTA, G. D. 2015 Carbonate build-ups in lacustrine, hydrothermal and fluvial settings comparing depositional geometry, fabric types and geochemical signature. Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production, 418p. SOUZA, L.S. SGARBI, G.N.C. 2016. Bacia de Santos De promissora a principal bacia produtora de hidrocarbonetos do Brasil. In Congresso Brasileiro de Geologia, 48, Porto Alegre, 2016. Resumos, Porto Alegre, Sociedade Brasileira de Geologia, p. 278-279. STRUGALE, M. SCHMITT, R. S. CARTWRIGHT, J. 2021. Basement geology and its controls on the nucleation and growth of rift faults in the northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Basin Res. 2021 00 1 28. https doi.org 10.1111 bre.12540 SZATMARI, P. MILANI, E. J. Tectonic control of the oilrich large igneous-carbonate-salt province of the South Atlantic rift Marine and Petroleum Geology, vol. 77, p 567 596, 2016. WALKER, R.G. 1992. Facies, facies models and modern stratigraphic concepts. In Walker,R.G., James, N.P. Eds. , Facies Models Response to Sea Level Change. Geological Association of Canada, St. Johns, NF, pp. 1 14. Seventeenth International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society View publication stats

[END_OF_PAPER]

Journal of Sedimentary Environments Published by Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro 2 2 133-148 April-August, 2017 doi 10.12957 jse.2017.30052 RESEARCH PAPER TECTONO-STRATIGRAPHIC EVOLUTION OF LAPA FIELD PRE-SALT SECTION, SANTOS BASIN SE BRAZILIAN CONTINENTAL MARGIN SUZANA FARIA CHULA RIBEIRO DA SILVA1, EGBERTO PEREIRA1 1 Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Faculdade de Geologia, Departamento de Estratigrafia e Paleontologia. Av. Sa o Francisco Xavier, 524, sala 2020A, Maracana . 20550-013 Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil. sufariaribeiro gmail.com, egberto uerj.br. C ORRESPONDING AUTHOR , egberto uerj.br Received on 28 Jully 2017 Received in revised form on 14 August 2017 Accepted on 15 August 2017 Editor Maria Virginia Alves Martins, Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Citation Ribeiro da Silva, S.F.C., Pereira, E., 2017. Tectono-stratigraphic evolution of Lapa field Pre-salt section, Santos Basin SE Brazilian continental margin . Journal of Sedimentary Environments, 2 2 133-148 Abstract Santos Basin is located in the southeast of the Brazilian continental margin and was created by rifting processes during the Gondwana break up and opening of the South Atlantic, initiated in the Neocomian Cretaceous . The area gained renewed attention from the oil industry due to recent Petrobras huge discoveries of carbonate reservoirs below the salt layer Pre-salt . The discovery of this new play in deep and ultra-deep water opened a new exploratory frontier in Brazil, generating excellent economic prospects for the country. The case study of this work is the Lapa Field, discovered in 2007 by Petrobras, which is located in deep water and represents one of the largest producing fields of the Pre-salt. This research aims to improve the actual model for the tectono-stratigraphic evolution of the Pre-salt section on the Santos Basin Brazil . The used database includes the public data provided by National Petroleum Agency ANP six post-stack 2D seismic lines migrated in time and four wells . Main Pre-salt horizons and faults were mapped considering the Exxon Model to do the seismic-stratigraphy interpretation. A velocity model was constructed for the Lapa field, which enable the generation of isopach maps. All these products allow a better visualization of the tectonostratigraphic evolution of the region and also show the salt thickness variation, analyzing the reason of its behavior. Keywords Pre-salt. Lapa Field. Santos Basin. Seismicstratigraphy interpretation. Velocity model. 1. Introduction The discovery of large oil accumulations in deepwater offshore in the section below the salt opens a new exploratory frontier. The presence of this new play has generated great economic prospects for Brazil, which would mean reducing its energy dependence and make the country one of the world s largest producers of oil and gas Riccomini et al., 2012 . In order to know more about the huge sub-salt discoveries, the interest in understanding the origin and evolution of the marginal basins with the purpose of improve the tectonostratigraphic evolution model of this section in the Field is increasing. This involves not only sedimentation siliciclastic, evaporite and carbonate , but also tectonic movement, accommodation space creation and climate changes. The main objective of this work is to analyze the isopach maps generated for the Pre-salt section of the Lapa Field, with the purpose of improve the tectonostratigraphic evolution model of this section and understand the salt behavior in this field. 133 Journal of Sedimentary Environments Published by Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro 2 2 133-148 April-August, 2017 doi 10.12957 jse.2017. 30052 RESEARCH PAPER The Santos Basin, located in the southern part of the Brazilian offshore continental margin, is limited to the north by the Cabo Frio High, separating it from Campos Basin, and to the south by the Floriano polis High and Floriano polis Fracture Zone FFZ , which separates it from Pelotas Basin Contreras et al., 2010 . It is a prolific area, being one of the most exploratory basins. In 2007, Petrobras discovered in the Santos Basin a new exploratory play in deep and ultradeep waters with a great economic accumulation of excellent quality oil Lula, Sapinhoa and Lapa Fields and Libra, Carcara and Jupiter discoveries. The high exploratory success rate of this type of reservoir can be justified due to a competent petroleum system, with excellent values of porosity and permeability of the carbonate reservoir. It can be linked to the source rock and the efficient seal of the salt layer Chang et al., 2008 . According to information from the National Petroleum Agency, at the Monthly Bulletin of May 2017 ANP, 2017 , the Pre-salt represents today 1,572 Mboe d and it means 47.5 of the total produced in Brazil. The Lapa Field production describes 3 of this Pre-salt total with 52,906 boe d from 3-BRSA-861-SPS and 7-LPA-1D-SPS wells. Because of this, the studied of the Pre-salt in the Lapa Field are extremely relevant and have high scientific, industrial and financial interest. Along with this, there are not many works published on the subject. The Santos Basin is developed on a geological context of the breakup of Gondwana, associated with the opening of the South Atlantic Ocean White and Mckenzie, 1989 . The start of the rupture occurred by the south of the Supercontinent and it is linked to lithospheric stretching and thermal anomalies hotspots phenomena Fig. 1 . In addition to this initial pole of rupture between South America and Africa, there were other two well-known hotspots in the area. The first one was located below the actual Santos Basin, called Trista o da Cunha hotspot White and Mckenzie, 1989 which allowed that part of the continental crust has become more ductile and less resistant to stretch Pereira and Macedo, 1990 . This led to the formation of a wider range of crustal thinning known as Sa o Paulo Plateau. Trista o da Cunha thermal anomaly also allowed the initial formation of the Rio Grande and Walvis volcanic chains White and Mckenzie, 1989 , two prominent features that form the symmetrical axis of the seafloor spreading Vidal et al., 2003 . The second hot spot was developed later in northeast of Brazil St Helena hot spot and is related to the rifting processes and marine incursions in this region Wilson, 1992 . Fig. 1. Gondwana breakup stages, from rifting process until the completely ruptured forming the Mid Oceanic Ridge. Red circles indicate the influence zone of Trista o da Cunha and St Helena hotspots. Modified from Beasley et al. 2010 . The study basin is classified as a Passive Margin basin type and can be subdivided into three depositional supersequences, including the rift, post-rift and drift phases Moreira et al., 2007 . The Pre-salt section is formed by the rift and post-rift phases. Rift supersequence is composed by Camboriu, Pic arras and Itapema Formations with sedimentary records between the Hauterivian and Eoaptian Ages and Post-rift supersequence is composed by Barra Velha and Ariri Formations with a sedimentary record deposited during the Aptian Moreira et al., 2007 . The Camboriu Formation marks the beginning of the rifting process in the basin and represents the economic basement, with basaltic dyke swarms. The Pic arras Formation is formed by siliciclastic sediments with conglomerates and sandstones in the proximal portions and lamination of talc-stevensite composition and dark shales organic matter rich in the most 134 Journal of Sedimentary Environments Published by Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro 2 2 133-148 April-August, 2017 doi 10.12957 jse.2017. 30052 RESEARCH PAPER distal portions. The Itapema Formation marks the end of the Rift stage in the basin and is characterized by calcirrudites with dolomitized Pelecypoda shells coquinas fragments and dark shales organic matter rich intercalations. The Barra Velha Formation marks the beginning of the Post-rift phase in the basin, with the first marine incursions and consists of microbial limestones and stromatolites talc and magnesium clays rich in the proximal portions and carbonate shales in the distal portions Moreira et al., 2007 . The Ariri Formation marks the end of the Post-rift phase and is characterized by evaporites composed essentially of halite and anhydrite and less commonly by tachydrite, carnallite and sylvinite. This salt layer can reach significant thicknesses of 2000m to 2500m Pereira and Macedo, 1990 and is conditioned by two factors that provided the ideal conditions for this salt basins the alignment of the Floriano polis High, Dorsal de Sa o Paulo and Rio Grande Elevation seafloor structures that blocked the circulation of the Atlantic Ocean already existing in the south Pelotas Basin and the dry and hot climate prevailing in that time Demercian, 1996 . Regarding the geodynamic evolution of the salt basins, Cainelli and Mohriak 1998 characterized five main stages Fig. 2 . The first phase is marked by the beginning of extentional process with the asthenospheric uplift and lithospheric underlining due a thermal anomaly Fig. 2-I , the second phase is marked by the increase of the lithospheric stretching with tectonic activity of faults that control the local depocenters, blocks rotation of, continental flood basalts and formation of half-grabens Fig. 2-II . The midAtlantic Ridge was and is still responsible for the creation of oceanic crust that probably began to be formed at the end of the rift episodes. The third phase is associated with continental and oceanic volcanism, the reactivation of principal faults and erosion of the rift blocks due a regional erosive discordance between the rift and post-rift sections breakup unconformity Fig. 2-III . The fourth phase is marked by the first localized marine incursion and corresponds to the Aptian carbonate deposition, culminating with salt deposition at the top of the post-rift sequence Fig. 2-IV . The fifth phase represents the passive margin phase, already in the free marine zone, with the formation of a shallow Albian carbonaceous platform, progressively replaced by siliciclastic sequences with the increase of accommodation space and the influx of sediments Fig. 2-V . 1.1. Study area The Santos Basin is located in the southeast of the Brazilian continental margin. It is limited on north by the Cabo Frio High bordering with Campos Basin , on south by Floriano polis High bordering with Pelotas Basin and extends to east to the Sa o Paulo Plateau boundary Fig. 3 . This basin is exclusively offshore with approximately 350,000 km2. Fig. 2. Geodynamic model of Passive Margin Basins, according to Cainelli and Mohriak 1998 . Lapa Field, target of this work, is located in the central portion of the Santos Basin Fig. 4 . This is the third Pre-salt field put into production in Santos Basin, after Lula and Sapinhoa fields Fig. 4 . Initially, when discovered by Petrobras in 2007, this field was named as Carioca area, but with the commercial declaration submitted to ANP in December 2013, this name was changed to Lapa Field, going into production on December 2016. The field s production potential was estimated at 28,000 boe d, through a long- 135 Journal of Sedimentary Environments Published by Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro 2 2 133-148 April-August, 2017 doi 10.12957 jse.2017. 30052 RESEARCH PAPER term test carried out in 2011. It is made up of a carbonate reservoir with good quality light oil around 26o API with a total recoverable volume estimated at 459 Mboe, according to Petrobras. Fig. 3. Santos Basin location map. Dotted and dashed lines represent important ocean floor structural features. FFZ Floriano polis Fracture Zone. Modified from Contreras et al. 2010 . units A, B, C, D and E were identified based on the seismic reflection configuration Severiano Ribeiro, 2001 Fig. 6 . To aid map the main events, attributes were used to facilitate the recognition of patterns and highlight the desired structures unconformities, faults, fractures . Conceptually, seismic attributes are transformations and or mathematical manipulations of the original data in order to improve geological characteristics that would not previously be detected. It is possible change the phase, frequency, seismic trace or amplitude of the data, depending on the objective. The amplitude of attributes used in this work were the Technique Volume Amplitudes TecVA and Sweetness. The phase-rotated TecVA is a volumetric attribute generated from the Hilbert inverse transform Bulho es and Amorim, 2005 , resulting of the compilation of three volume attributes RMS Amplitude, Remove Bias and Phase Shift in the software Petrel 2015. It highlights the high impedance contrasts that are empirically given by differences in lithologies different velocities and was applied in this work to identify discontinuities and faults. Sweetness is derived from a mathematical formula that divides the instantaneous amplitude intensity by the square root of the instantaneous frequency. It is usually used to map channels or bodies of sand into shales when there is a significant difference in acoustic impedance. In this work, Sweetness was used to delimit the top of the basement and for well-defined faults. 2. Materials and Methods In the present work, six post-stack 2D seismic in time domain PSTM and four exploratory wells were supplied by the National Petroleum Agency ANP Fig. 5 . Although the four wells composite logs were analyzed, looking at the lithology description and petrophysics curves, only two wells could be tied due the greater proximity of the seismic lines. The project was done in Petrel 2015 software. The workflow for this project includes the seismic stratigraphy interpretation of the PSTM seismic lines with the proper well-tie and the velocity model build that allowed the generation of the isopach maps. 2.1. Seismic-stratigraphy interpretation Horizons chosen to map during this work are the main ones of the Pre-salt section top salt Top of the Ariri Formation - Fm. , base salt top of the Barra Velha Fm. , top rift top of Itapema Fm. , top intra-rift top of Pic arras Fm. and top basement. They were identified considering the continuity, amplitude and reflector termination when possible. In addition, major faults were mapped. Five seismic Fig. 4. Location map of Lapa Field and other important fields and discoveries in Santos Basin. Modified from BDEP WEBMAPS http app.anp.gov.br webmaps access 19.05.2017. In addition to the seismic interpretation, two wells with the respective seismic line 1-BRSA-491-SPS with the seismic line VB99-186 and 3-BRSA-1023-SPS with the seismic line VB99-188 were tied. 136 Journal of Sedimentary Environments Published by Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro 2 2 133-148 April-August, 2017 doi 10.12957 jse.2017. 30052 RESEARCH PAPER The procedure to perform the well-tie consists of three steps White and Simm, 2003 a edit and calibrate the sonic profile DT b construct the synthetic seismogram using well-calibrated well profiles with a wavelet and c tie the synthetic seismogram to the actual seismic section. The calibration of the DT profile consists of analyzing and correcting the anomalous velocity values, from the well checkshot. With this, it is possible to have a better stabilization of the time-depth values measured along the well. The synthetic seismogram in this case, considered the seismic response in the well, was constructed from the convolution of the reflectivity coefficient with the Ricker wavelet seismic pulse with frequency of 25Hz . Finally, the synthetic seismogram is tied with seismic trace anchoring the corresponding events. This generates the interval velocities that will be used in the velocity model build. 2.2. Velocity Model The velocity modeling is responsible for enable seismic data migrated in time to be converted to the depth domain time-depth conversion . To be considered a close representation of the subsurface, a depth seismic section need to be converted from a velocity-depth model sufficiently accurate Yilmaz, 2001 . With depth seismic it is possible to analyze the thickness and depth of the layers, having more geological interpretation of the area. In this work, the velocity model was made only for the south-central part of the Lapa Field, due to greater amount of available data well-tie and horizons interpreted . To build the velocity model, surfaces in time extrapolation of the mapped horizons were created, considering a polygon defined by the interpreter. In this case a polygon was drawn close to the Lapa Field, as the extension of the seismic lines is large and the well-tied well is inside the field. If these surfaces were generated by connecting the seismic lines boundaries, the coverage area would be very large and the reliability of the velocity model would be low. For the velocity model build were used as inputs the surfaces in time and the well-tops defined and the velocities for the 1-BRSA-491-SPS well. These velocities were defined based on the interval velocities obtained from points of the well-tie. The velocity for the Pic arras Fm. and basement were estimated based on literature, since the well 1-BRSA-491-SPS did not reach these formations. Fig. 5. 2D seismic lines and wells composing the database. Zoom map showing the data name. 137 Journal of Sedimentary Environments Published by Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro 2 2 133-148 April-August, 2017 doi 10.12957 jse.2017. 30052 RESEARCH PAPER 2.3. Isopach maps The isopach maps represent sedimentary thicknesses and were constructed in Petrel 2015 software from the difference between two surfaces already converted to depth by the velocity model. The products generated in this step are isopach maps of the Lower and Upper Rift Sequence and Lower and Upper Pos-rift Sequence. From the seismic horizons mapped it was possible individualize five seismic units Tab. 2 A, B, C, D and E, respectively interpreted as basement, Lower Rift Sequence, Upper Rift Sequence, Lower Pos-rift Sequence and Upper Pos-rift Sequence. During the seismic-stratigraphy interpretation, faults were observed reaching the seismic horizon H4, interpreted as the base salt Fig. 8 . Through the composite logs available by ANP it is possible to observe that the base salt is basically composed by anhydrite. This mineral has a brittle behavior due a high density around 2.9 g cm-3 , compared to halite. Tab. 1. Interpreted horizons and their characterization. Horizon H1 Characteristics Positive discontinuous reflector with varied amplitude. Difficult mapping interface identified using Sweetness attribute. As the seismic wave energy is absorbed as the depth increases, there is not a great contrast between lithologies allowing generate a large variation of acoustic impedance and creating a well-marked reflector. Positive discontinuous reflector with medium amplitude intensely failures . Interpretation Top basement H3 Positive reflector with high amplitude. Discontinuous in some parts due to the occurrence of faults. Top Rift Top Itapema Fm. H4 Well marked positive continuous reflector with high amplitude. Presence of a basal layer of anhydrite that at some points is cut by reactivated faults Fig. 8 . The anhydrite has a higher seismic velocity and density than the overlapped halite characterizing a high contrast of acoustic impedance. It loses resolution at the base of large salt diapirs, impairing interpretation. Very well marked positive continuous reflector with high amplitude. Intensely deformed because of the halokinesis. Base Salt Top Barra Velha Fm. H2 Fig. 6. Seismic reflection configuration pattern. Modified from Mitchum et al. 1977 . 3. Results and Discussion 3.1. Seismic Units In this study, targeting the Pre-salt section, the main five seismic horizons were mapped Fig. 7 H1, H2, H3, H4, and H5, respectively interpreted as top basement, top intra-rift top Pic arras Fm. , top rift top Itapema Fm. , base salt top Barra Velha Fm. and top salt top Ariri Fm. Tab. 1 . The seafloor was mapped only for control. The top intra-rift horizon is considered a flood surface into the rift phase, based on 1BRSA-491-SPS and 3-BRSA-861-SPS gamma ray pattern. Among these Pre-salt horizons, the base salt and top rift is the more reliable, since they were tied with wells 1-BRSA-491-SPS and 3-BRSA-1023-SPS base salt only . The horizons were mapped based on the amplitude, frequency and reflector terminations onlap, downlap, toplap, etc. . H5 Top Intra-rift Top Pic arras Fm. Top Salt Top Ariri Fm. 138 Journal of Sedimentary Environments Published by Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro 2 2 133-148 April-August, 2017 doi 10.12957 jse.2017. 30052 RESEARCH PAPER According to the seismic unit D, using the TecVA attribute, it is possible to observe a restricted acoustic impedance contrast at the base of the sequence, seismic signature characteristic of igneous rocks in relation to the sedimentary layers igneous rocks have high seismic velocities, Vp 5-7 km s -1 . This can be interpreted as saucer-shaped bodies or lopoliths Fig. 9 . With the 2D data available, it was not possible to define the diameter and thickness of this igneous body, only the record of it. Tab. 2. Characterization of the mapped seismic facies. Seismic facies Characteristics Interpretation A Top H1 top basement . Chaotic or transparent seismic facies with faults, some reaching the base salt Fig. 9 Basement B Base H1 top basement Top H2 top intra-rift . Prograding or divergent seismic facies indicating creation of accommodation space. Intense failures due to high tectonic activity. Base H2 top intra-rift Top H3 top rift . Even parallel to subparallel seismic facies at some points and divergent in others. Growth failures mapped indicating deposition was syntectonic. Lower Rift Sequence Pic arras Fm. Base H3 top rift Top H4 base salt . Even parallel seismic facies with plane-parallel reflectors indicating a agradational process. Cut by a few faults reach the base salt due to the anhydrite reptile behavior Fig. 8 . Base H4 base salt Top H5 top salt . Transparent seismic facies massive salt and, in some parts, even parallel seismic facies stratified salt . Intensely deformed. The presence of this distinct configuration regular parallel is consequence of the acoustic impedance contrasts variations, generated by different evaporite deposition stages Fig. 10 . Lower Pos-rift Sequence Barra Velha Fm. C D E Different seismic reflection configurations were observed in the seismic unit E. Transparent seismic facies, interpreted as massive salt, are present in the salt diapirs while the parallel even seismic facies, interpreted as stratified salt, are present in the lower parts of the salt structures Fig. 10 . With the PSTM seismic lines analysis it is possible to notice that there is a lateral compartmentation of the stratified salt in relation to the massive salt, it seems that there is an interdigitation of the layers. In addition, with halokinesis, halite, due to a plastic behavior, cut the evaporate deposition layers forming thickness diapirs. 3.2. Velocity Model The velocity model was well consistent with acceptable velocities for the sequences and the depth converted surfaces coincide with the well tops in the well area Fig. 11 . Despite this, the velocities for above the salt, Pic arras Fm. and basement were estimated based on the literature because there are no points tied to the well. 3.3. Basement map The basement surface map was generated as shown in figure 12. In this one, we observe a depth structure to SW, Upper Rift Sequence Itapema Fm. Upper Pos-rift Sequence Ariri Fm. apparently controlled by a WNW-ESE structure and it is also possible notice a higher zone in the center region of the map a basement high . 3.4. Isopach Maps Based on the isopach maps it is possible to analyze the thickness of the mapped sequences in seismic and thus better understand their deposition phases over time. Thickness maps were constructed for the south-center portion of the Lapa Field Fig. 13 , from the same polygon of the time surfaces used as input for the velocity model. The main products generated as isopach maps are Lower Fig. 14 and Upper Rift Sequence Fig. 15 and Lower Fig. 16 and Upper Pos-Rift Sequence Fig. 17 . 3.5. Tectono-stratigraphic evolution From the generated maps, it was possible to observe that the basement surface Fig. 12 and the isopach map of the Lower Rift Sequence Fig. 14 are similar. In this first evolution stage, the basement controls the sedimentary deposition, through a WNW-ESE main structure, causing a greater sedimentary thickness in the SW portion of the Lapa Field location of the main rift at that time . 139 Journal of Sedimentary Environments Published by Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro 2 2 133-148 April-August, 2017 doi 10.12957 jse.2017. 30052 RESEARCH PAPER Fig. 7. VB99-33 PSTM 2D regional seismic line with TecVA atributte crossing by the 3-BRSA-1023-SPS well and showing the principals seismic horizons H1, H2, H3, H4, and H5 and seismic units A, B, C, D and E defined in this work. 140 Journal of Sedimentary Environments Published by Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro 2 2 133-148 April-August, 2017 doi 10.12957 jse.2017. 30052 RESEARCH PAPER Fig. 8. VB99-186 PSTM 2D seismic line with TecVA atributte showing faults that reach the base salt indicated by the red arrows. The principal seismic horizons H1, H2, H3, H4, and H5 are marked. 141 Journal of Sedimentary Environments Published by Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro 2 2 133-148 April-August, 2017 doi 10.12957 jse.2017. 30052 RESEARCH PAPER Fig. 9. VB99-188 2D PSTM seismic line with TecVA attribute with saucer-shaped bodies highlighted in the red arrows. The principal seismic horizons H1, H2, H3, H4, and H5 are marked in the bottom image. 142 Journal of Sedimentary Environments Published by Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro 2 2 133-148 April-August, 2017 doi 10.12957 jse.2017. 30052 RESEARCH PAPER Fig. 10. VB99-184 PSTM 2D seismic line in the blue-red bright color scale showing the different salt seismic responses massive and stratified. The principal seismic horizons H1, H2, H3, H4, and H5 are marked. Dashed line indicates the top of a possible interdigitation of the stratified and massive salt. 143 Journal of Sedimentary Environments Published by Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro 2 2 133-148 April-August, 2017 doi 10.12957 jse.2017. 30052 RESEARCH PAPER located on the lateral of the map whereas in the center there is less thickness indicating a region that did not suffer a strong deformation. Fig. 12. Basement surface map in depth domain. Fig. 11. VB99-186 2D seismic line in depth domain with 1-BRSA491-SPS well, used to build the velocity model. In the Upper Rift Sequence Fig. 15 , sedimentation phase of the coquinas, the tectonic is still active, although with less intensity, and there is a displacement of the main rift depocenter to SE with new structures controlling its deposition. In the thickness map of the Lower Post-rift Sequence of Santos Basin Fig. 16 , there is a significant change in the unit thickness. The thickness variation in the region as a whole is 200 m 50 m to 240 m indicating that the basin begins to get flat. Finally, in the isopach map of the Upper Pos-rift Sequence Fig. 17 it is possible to notice the basin restructuring, caused by the intense halokinesis. The larger salt thicknesses are Fig. 13. Isopach maps location in the south-central portion of the Lapa Field. Upper Pos-rift Sequence represented in the map. 144 Journal of Sedimentary Environments Published by Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro 2 2 133-148 April-August, 2017 doi 10.12957 jse.2017. 30052 RESEARCH PAPER of the salt, it is not possible to know in seismic lines if these faults propagate in the salt or effectively end at the base salt. The Rift Sequences isopach maps show a displacement of the main rift depocenter in the region of the Lapa Field from SW to SE, controlled by new structures. This change of the depocenter during the rift stage may have caused by a perturbation in the petroleum system of the region, more specifically in the migration process. With the variation of the structural control of the area, there were probably a change of direction in the faults that act as conduits for the oil transport. Fig. 14. Lower Rift Sequence isopach map. The evaporites of Ariri Fm. in the area are composed mainly by halite and anhydrite analyzing the wells composite logs available by ANP . Anhydrite exhibits a more brittle behavior while the halite has a more ductile behavior. As the salt deforms, the halite can be more plastic, flowing better, and reaches larger thicknesses forming the huge salt diapirs. Where there are cycles of anhydrite deposition stratified salt , the behavior of the salt in the deformation front changes, not being so intense. With this, the salt structures do not present such significant thicknesses. Greater amount of anhydrite means smaller thickness of the salt. The deformation of the salt is also controlled by external factors of differential burial, gravitational instabilities de Melo Garcia et al., 2012 and tectonics. In figure 18 it is possible to observe the different salt behaviors, justified by the mineralogical composition variation. The tectono-stratigraphic evolution shown by isopach maps corroborates the current Pre-salt model described in the literature Papaterra, 2010 Riccomini et al., 2012 . There is a first phase of sedimentation rift stage with intense tectonic activity and a second phase of sedimentation Post-rift stage with less tectonic activity because it is a transitional environment changing from a continental to shallow marine environment which allowed the deposition of the evaporites at the end. As reported in seismic units A and D Tab. 1 and 2 , there were faults mapped reaching the base salt composed by anhydrite - more brittle and they disappear inside the salt. Because of the characteristically transparent seismic signature Fig. 15. Upper Rift Sequence isopach map. 4. Conclusion From the seismic-stratigraphy interpretation and well tie, it was possible to map six Pre-salt main seismic horizons H1, H2, H3, H4 and H5, respectively interpreted as the top basement, top intra-rift, top rift, base salt and top salt. They are positive regional reflectors that individualize the seismic units. Five seismic units were identified based on the seismic reflection configuration A, B, C, D and E. Briefly, seismic unit A, interpreted as Basement, presents chaotic sismofacies with some faults reaching the top of seismic unit D the seismic unit B, interpreted as the Lower Rift Sequence, shows prograding to divergent sismofacies due to the space creation during the rifting process the seismic unit C, interpreted as Upper Rift Sequence, shows parallel even and divergent sismofacies with the presence of growth faults indicating that the deposition was still syntectonic the seismic unit D, interpreted as the 145 Journal of Sedimentary Environments Published by Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro 2 2 133-148 April-August, 2017 doi 10.12957 jse.2017. 30052 RESEARCH PAPER Lower Pos-rift Sequence, presents parallel even sismofacies and represents an agradational process with little faults reactivation and the seismic unit E, interpreted as Upper Posrift Sequence, presents mainly transparent sismofacies massive salt with some parts individualizing a laminar parallel configuration justified by the presence of stratified salt in the salt structures. Fig. 17. Upper Pos-rift Sequence isopach map. Fig. 16. Lower Pos-rift Sequence isopach map. Building the velocity model for the Lapa field region, it was possible to generate the isopach maps of the Lower and Upper Rift Sequences and the Lower and Upper Pos-rift Sequences. With these maps, it was possible to analyze the tectonostratigraphic evolution of the Pre-salt section, starting with a rift phase with greater sedimentary thickness to a time when it starts to get flat Barra Velha Fm. finishing with the salt deposition. Halokinesis made the framework for the drift section deposition on the basin. Some aspects of the Pre-salt section evolution were differently detailed in relation to the current model identified faults that reach the proposed base salt, displacement of depocenter during the rift phase and also the lateral variation of the salt layers composition, from massive to stratified. Due to the seismic quality and the plastic salt behavior, it was not possible to identify the propagation of the faults that cut the base salt composed by basal anhydrite according to well data . Thus, the question is whether they reach only the base or propagate through the salt. If these also cut the salt, perhaps the evaporites do not behave as a perfect seal as it has been considered in the literature. In this way, the present work is based on the data interpretation for the south-central region of the Lapa Field, in order to improve the understanding of the tectonostratigraphic evolution and salt behavior for the area. Acknowledgment The authors are grateful to Age ncia Nacional do Petro leo, Ga s Natural e Biocombusti veis - ANP for the availability of the data used in this work. The authors also would like to thank the Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro - UERJ Seismostratigraphy Laboratory for the infrastructure to carry out the research and Fundac a o de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado do Rio de Janeiro - FAPERJ and Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cienti fico e Tecnolo gico - CNPq for the financial received support. References ANP Banco de Dados BDEP WEBMAPS. URL http app.anp.gov.br webmaps . Access 19.05.2017. ANP, 2017. Boletim da Produc a o de Petro leo e Ga s Natural de Maio 2017 Nu mero 81. Beasley, C. J., Fiduk, J. C., Bize, E., Boyd, A., Frydman, M., Zerili, A., Dribus, J.R., Moreira, J.L.P., Pinto, A.C.C., 2010. Brazil s Presalt Play. Oilfield Review, 22 3 , 28-37. Bulho es, E.M., Amorim, N.W., 2005. Princi pio da SismoCamada Elementar e sua aplicac a o a Tecnica Volume de Amplitude tecVA . 9th International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society EXPOGEF, Salvador, Bahia, Brazil, 11-14. 146 Journal of Sedimentary Environments Published by Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro 2 2 133-148 April-August, 2017 doi 10.12957 jse.2017. 30052 RESEARCH PAPER Fig. 18. Salt thickness variation. A Major salt thickness in massive salt halite and presence of stratified salt laterally B Massive salt halite and C Massive salt halite with anhydrite at the top reflecting a less thickening in this region. 147 Journal of Sedimentary Environments Published by Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro 2 2 133-148 April-August, 2017 doi 10.12957 jse.2017. 30052 RESEARCH PAPER Cainelli, C., Mohriak, W.U., 1998. Geology of the Atlantic Eastern Brazilian Basins. In Rio 98 AAPG International Conference and Exhibition, Short Course - Brazilian Geology. Chang, H.K., Assine, M.L., Corre a, F.S., Tinen, J.S., Vidal, A.C., Koike, L., 2008. Sistemas petroli feros e modelos de acumulac a o de hidrocarbonetos na Bacia de Santos. Revista Brasileira de Geocie ncias 38 2 , 29-46. Contreras, J., Zu hlke, R., Bowman, S., Bechsta dt, T., 2010. Seismic stratigraphy and subsidence analysis of the southern Brazilian margin Campos, Santos and Pelotas basins . Marine and Petroleum Geology 27 9 , 1952-1980. DOI 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2010.06.007 De Melo Garcia, F.S., Danderfer Filho, A., De Lamotte, D.F., Rudkiewicz, J.L., 2012. Ana lise de volumes de sal em restaurac a o estrutural um exemplo na bacia de Santos. Revista Brasileira de Geocie ncias 42 2 , 433-450. DOI 10.5327 Z0375-75362012000200016 Demercian, L.S., 1996. A halocinese na evoluc a o do sul da bacia de Santos do Aptiano ao Creta ceo superior. Dissertac a o de Mestrado, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, 201 p. Mitchum, R.M., 1977. Seismic stratigraphy and global changes of sea level Part 11. Glossary of terms used in seismic stratigraphy Section 2. Application of seismic reflection configuration to stratigraphic interpretation. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Memoirs 26, 205-212. Moreira, J.L.P., Madeira, C.V., Gil, J.A., Machado, M.A.P., 2007. Bacia de Santos. Rio de Janeiro. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, Rio de Janeiro, 15 2 , 531-549. Papaterra, G.E.Z., 2010. Pre -sal Conceituac a o geolo gica sobre uma nova fronteira explorato ria no Brasil. Dissertac a o de mestrado. Instituto de Geocie ncias, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro. Pereira, M.J., Macedo, J.M., 1990. A Bacia de Santos perspectivas de uma nova provi ncia petroli fera na plataforma continental sudeste brasileira. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, Rio de Janeiro, 4 1 , 3-11. Riccomini, C., Sant, L.G., Tassinari, C.C.G., 2012. Pre -sal geologia e explorac a o. Revista USP 95 , 33-42. Severiano Ribeiro, H.J.P., 2001. Estratigrafia de seque ncias fundamentos e aplicac o es. Sa o Leopoldo, RS, Editora da Universidade do Vale do Rio dos Sinos, 428 p. Vidal, C.A., Kiang, H.C., Correa, S.F., Fernandes, L.F., Castro, C.J., Tinen, S.J., Koike, L., Assine, M.L., Rostirolla, P.S., 2003. Interpretac a o e Mapeamento dos Sistemas Petroli feros da Bacia de Santos. ANP UNESP LEBAC. 180p. White, R.E., Simm, RW., 2003. Tutorial good practice in well ties. First Break 21 10 , 75-83. White, R. S., McKenzie, D.P., 1989. Magmatism at rift zones the generation of volcanic continental margins and flood basalts. Journal of Geophysical Research 94 B6 , 7685-7729. DOI 10.1029 JB094iB06p07685 Wilson, M., 1992. Magmatism and continental rifting during the opening of the South Atlantic Ocean a consequence of Lower Cretaceous super-plume activity Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 68 1 , 241-255. DOI 10.1144 GSL.SP.1992.068.01.15 Yilmaz, O ., 2001. Seismic data analysis Processing, inversion, and interpretation of seismic data. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 1-24. DOI 10.1190 1.978156080158 148

[END_OF_PAPER]

Journal of Sedimentary Research, 2017, v. 87, 1285 1313 Research Article DOI http dx.doi.org 10.2110 jsr.2017.70 INFLUENCE OF DIAGENESIS ON THE QUALITY OF LOWER CRETACEOUS PRE-SALT LACUSTRINE CARBONATE RESERVOIRS FROM NORTHERN CAMPOS BASIN, OFFSHORE BRAZIL RONALDO HERLINGER, JR.,1 EVELINE ELLEN ZAMBONATO,2 AND LUIZ FERNANDO DE ROS3 1 Petrobras S.A., Avenida Repu blica do Chile, 330, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil Petrobras S.A., Avenida Nossa Senhora da Penha, 1688, Barro Vermelho, Vito ria, ES, Brazil 3 Instituto de Geocie ncias, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil e-mail ronaldo.herlinger petrobras.com.br 2 ABSTRACT The genesis and evolution of lacustrine pre-salt carbonate reservoirs, which contain giant hydrocarbon accumulations along the South Atlantic margins, has attracted major research interest. The huge extension and volume, and unusual textural and compositional features, are key elements for understanding the tectonic, structural, stratigraphic, and sedimentological generation and early evolution of the region, as well as potentially of other lacustrine carbonate systems. A systematic petrographic and petrophysical study has been performed on the Lower Cretaceous lacustrine carbonate reservoirs from northern Campos Basin, Offshore Brazil, in order to unravel the main controls on the origin and evolution of pore systems. The main lithologic types recognized in the rift section are bivalve gastropod grainstones and rudstones, arenites constituted by ooids of syngenetic magnesian clay minerals mostly stevensite , and dolostones, while stevensitic claystones with calcite spherulites, fascicular calcite crusts, intraclastic rudstones and grainstones, and dolostones are the main lithologic types in the sag section. The eogenetic evolution of bioclastic reservoirs was controlled by the balance between dissolution and neomorphism of the aragonitic bivalve and gastropod bioclasts, favoring either the generation of poorly connected moldic porosity or the preservation of well-connected interparticle porosity. The stevensitic arenites were strongly affected by meteoric dissolution and replacement by dolomite and silica, related to regional uplift and erosion after the rift phase, which generated highly heterogeneous pore systems with moldic, intercrystalline, vugular, and microcrystalline pores. Stevensitic claystones that are replaced by calcite spherulites and dolomite normally show low porosity, but locally constitute reservoirs, where secondary porosity was generated by stevensite dissolution. The precipitation of crystal shrubs of fascicular-optic calcite in coalescent crusts generated growth-framework primary porosity, which was reduced mostly by dolomite cementation, or enlarged by dissolution, enhancing their permeability. Non-coalescent calcite crusts contain abundant syngenetic magnesian clay minerals. Their porosity is related to dissolution of these clays, which generated poor permeability. Intraclastic grainstones and rudstones are compacted and cemented, or rich in clay matrix hybrid packstones . Where they display preserved interparticle primary porosity or matrix dissolution, they may have good porosity and permeability. The heterogeneous dolomitization of both the rift and the sag deposits either destroyed their primary or early diagenetic porosity, or generated high porosity and permeability values in the dolostones. Relationships between replacement and compaction indicate that most of the diagenetic processes occurred during eodiagenesis, controlled mostly by the instability of the aragonite in the bioclastic reservoirs and of the stevensite in the claystones, ooidal arenites, and fascicular calcite crusts. This study characterizes the major primary and diagenetic aspects of the pre-salt reservoirs, providing insights on the evolution of their porosity and permeability. This is expected to contribute to the prediction of quality during exploration and to enhance hydrocarbon recovery from producing oilfields, as well as to increase the understanding of the origin, evolution, and quality distribution in analogous lacustrine reservoirs. INTRODUCTION In the last decade, giant hydrocarbon accumulations were discovered in lacustrine carbonate reservoirs below Aptian evaporites along the South Atlantic conjugate margins Carminatti et al. 2009 Sallet et al. 2016 . These reservoirs, together with important discoveries in China, have attracted significant interest in the exploration and scientific research of continental carbonates. The genesis and evolution of pre-salt reservoirs represent a geologic enigma that has puzzled many major researchers, by their huge extension and volume, their unusual textural and compositional features, and by what they will reveal about the South Atlantic tectonic, structural, stratigraphic, and sedimentological generation and early evolution. On the other hand, knowledge of continental carbonates is relatively restricted when compared to that of marine carbonates, which are much more voluminous and host giant reserves of hydrocarbons around the Published Online December 2017 Copyright O 2017, SEPM Society for Sedimentary Geology 1527-1404 17 087-1285 03.00 1286 R. HERLINGER, JR. ET AL. world. In this sense, the recent discoveries of huge hydrocarbon accumulations in lacustrine carbonates from Brazil, Africa, and China have attracted intense scientific interest for a better understanding of the formation and evolutionary processes of these reservoirs. Modern and ancient lacustrine carbonates are characterized by a great variability of facies and mineral species, having been studied for decades. Lacustrine carbonates strongly contrast with marine carbonates. While the main control on the environmental genetic conditions of marine carbonates is geological age Moore 2001 , lacustrine carbonates have their genesis controlled by local geological settings, such as tectonics, climate, fauna, and specific geochemical conditions that can form very particular deposits Davis and Wilkinson 1983 De Wett et al. 2002 Dunagan and Turner 2004 Gierlowski-Kordesch 2009 Fedorchuk 2014 . The deposition of lacustrine carbonates is controlled by several factors, including hydrological input and output of surface waters, precipitation, and groundwater flow , sedimentary input, and temperature variations Platt and Wright 1991 Tucker and Wright 1991 . Water geochemistry plays a major role in lacustrine environments, because it controls a number of processes, including development of microbial communities Riding and Liang 2005 Vasconcelos et al. 2006 Spadafora et al. 2010 , abiotic precipitation of carbonates Riding 2008 Wright and Barnett 2015 and clay minerals Calvo et al. 1999 Pozo and Casas 1999 Furquim et al. 2008 , and the development of algae, ostracodes, and mollusks bivalves or gastropods Casanova 1986 Renaut et al. 1986 Vincens et al. 1986 Harris et al. 1994 Frogley et al. 2002 . The pore systems of carbonate reservoirs, both continental and marine, show great diversity of pore types, and wide heterogeneity Choquette and Pray 1970 Mazzullo and Harris 1991 Lucia 1995 Moore 2001 Mazzullo 2004 L n y 2006 Ahr 2008 . Porosity is controlled by many factors, including the interplay of physical, chemical, and biological depositional processes, which are overprinted by intense diagenesis due to the chemical reactivity of carbonates, as well as by fracturing and hydrothermal processes Ehrenberg et al. 2006 Ehrenberg et al. 2012 Chafetz 2013 Brigaud et al. 2014 . In most cases, the porosity evolution patterns are controlled by a combination of mineral composition, fabric, and diagenetic conditions. The carbonate permeability frequently correlates poorly with porosity, due to heterogeneous porous framework, where the original fabric can be intensely modified by diagenetic processes Du rrast and Siegesmund 1999 Weger et al. 2009 van der Land et al. 2013 Rezende and Pope 2015 . The study of porosity geometry is important in characterization of carbonate reservoirs, supporting petrophysical interpretation and improving predictability of reservoir quality and heterogeneity Basan et al. 1997 Mountjoy and Marquez 1997 Eichenseer et al. 1999 Machel 2005 . The aim of this work is to discuss the impact of diagenesis on the evolution of porosity and permeability of pre-salt lacustrine carbonates from northern Campos Basin, through the combination of petrographic and petrophysical analyses. This work contributes to the prediction of quality during exploration and aims to enhance recovery from producing oilfields, as well as to increase the understanding of the origin, evolution, and quality distribution in analogous lacustrine reservoirs worldwide. GEOLOGICAL SETTING The Campos Basin is a passive-margin basin situated on the northern coast of the Rio de Janeiro State, Brazil Fig. 1A , extending to the southern coast of the Esp rito Santo State, being geographically located between parallels 218 and 238 S. The basin is located between the Santos Basin to the south, bounded by the Cabo Frio volcanic high, and the Esp rito Santo Basin to the north, bounded by the Vito ria High. The Campos Basin was formed under an extensional tectonic regime during the breakup of the Gondwana Continent during Late Jurassic Early Cretaceous, preceding the final separation of South America and Africa, JSR and the formation of the South Atlantic Ocean Rabinowitz and LaBrecque 1979 Austin and Uchupi 1982 Nu rnberg and Mu ller 1991 Cainelli and Mohriak 1999 Guardado et al. 2000 . The formation of the Atlantic Ocean started with crustal thinning and breakup of Sa o Francisco Congo Rio de La Plata Kalahari cratons, accreted during the Eoproterozoic orogeny. South Atlantic formation began during the Jurassic with rifting between Argentina and southern Africa, and through the Equatorial Margin Szatmari 2000 Meisling et al. 2001 Mohriak et al. 2008 . The rupture of the central portion, controlled by a resistant cratonic core Sa o Francisco Congo Craton , occurred later, in the Hauterivian Clemson et al. 1997 Karner and Driscoll 1999 , resulting in the development of a narrow rift zone in this region. The Santos, Esp rito Santo, and Campos basins, located on a Proterozoic fold belt, developed wider basins Mohriak et al. 2008 Rosendahl et al. 2005 . The Barremian to Aptian rift stage was characterized by increased lithospheric extension and asthenospheric uplift McKenzie 1978 White and McKenzie 1988 , associated with extensive intracratonic tholeiitic volcanism Turner et al. 1994 Mohriak et al. 2008 Torsvik et al. 2009 . Elongated deep lakes formed parallel to basement lineaments, and were filled with both volcanic and sedimentary rocks Dias et al. 1988 Mizusaki et al. 1988 . The presence of transfer zones played an important role in the partitioning of the rifted margin in subbasins Meisling et al. 2001 Muniz 2014 . The Aptian sag stage is preceded by uplift and erosion of the rift section, resulting in a regional unconformity Karner and Driscoll 1999 Dias 2005 Winter et al. 2007 . The initial sag sedimentation included carbonate, Mg-clays, and clastics, which are overlain by evaporites formed in an arid climate under influx of incursions of marine seawater Abraha o and Warme 1990 Karner and Gambo a 2007 . The last stage drift phase is characterized by the development of oceanic crust and a passive margin Chang et al. 1988 Chang et al. 1992 Aslanian et al. 2009 . The Lagoa Feia Group, originally defined by Schaller 1973 as the Lagoa Feia Formation, unconformably overlies pre-rift flood basalts from the Cabiu nas Formation, comprising the nonmarine to transitional sequences from the Campos Basin. Subsequently, the Lagoa Feia Formation has been subdivided into four distinct depositional sequences bounded by unconformities, including the Basal Clastic Sequence, the Talc-Stevensitic Sequence, the Coquinas Sequence, and the Clastic Evaporitic Sequence Dias et al. 1988 . The last two sequences are separated by the pre-Alagoas unconformity. More recently, Winter et al. 2007 subdivided the Lagoa Feia Formation into several formations, elevating it to group status Fig. 1B . The rift phase Coqueiros Formation is composed mainly of bioclastic rudstones and grainstones, informally known as coquinas, interfingered with proximal clastic sediments of the Itabapoana Formation towards the western margin of the basin. The Coqueiros Formation consists mainly of bioclasts of bivalve mollusks, with subordinate amounts of gastropods and ostracods. Some authors have proposed depositional and sedimentological models of bioclastic deposits. Castro et al. 1981 separated the bioclastic deposits into two types detrital coquinas consisting of bioclasts and noncarbonate grains talc-stevensite ooids and peloids and mud intraclasts and pure coquinas, composed entirely of bioclasts. Bertani and Carozzi 1985a recognized several microfacies, separating sequences dominated by bivalves and by ostracods, and according to variations on composition, grain size, matrix, and cement content. These authors related the distribution of microfacies to two distinct depositional models playalake settings dominated by ostracods, and pluvial-lake settings dominated by bivalve mollusks. Carvalho et al. 2000 recognized seven main depositional environments based on facies associations, including bioclastic beaches, bioclastic sandy beaches and marginal lacustrine settings, bioclastic sheet and bar fringes, consisting of shell debris deposited by storm events, bioaccumulation banks, and deep lacustrine settings. Recently, Goldberg et al. 2017 interpreted, based on the integration of quantitative petrography, sedimentology, and seismic JSR LACUSTRINE PRE-SALT CARBONATE RESERVOIRS FROM NORTHERN CAMPOS BASIN 1287 FIG. 1. A Location of the Campos Basin and the study area modified from Dias et al. 1988 . B Biozones Moura and Prac a 1985 Silva-Telles 1992 and stratigraphy of the Lagoa Feia Group Winter et al. 2007 . 1288 JSR R. HERLINGER, JR. ET AL. FIG. 2. Schematic correlation of the studied wells, showing distance between wells, units, gamma ray logs, and facies succession. stratigraphy, that the bioclastic rudstones correspond mostly to gravitational deposits, resedimented from structural highs to deeper lacustrine settings, throughout the rift section of the basin. Sag phase deposits from the Macabu Formation were referred to by Dias et al. 1988 as carbonate facies consisting of nodular diagenetic limestones and laminated limestones, probably algal in origin stromatolites . Later, Dias 2005 interpreted laminites and microbial stromatolites as supratidal and upper-intertidal facies, overlain by lower-intertidal clay-rich facies and subtidal mudstones deposited in an epicontinental context with extensive pre-evaporitic clastics located in shallow proximal regions. Muniz and Bosence 2015 interpreted the absence of both marine biota and normal freshwater biota, such as charophytes, and the presence of nonmarine ostracods, as evidence of a brackish-water lacustrine environment, refuting the presence of tidal influence on microbial development. However, recent interpretation suggests that most deposits from the Macabu Formation are chemical precipitates, controlled by the geochemistry of alkaline lacustrine waters Wright 2011, 2012, 2013 Tosca and Wright 2014 . Wright and Barnett 2015 identified a typical cyclothem as composed of three main components mud-grade laminated carbonates, accumulated in flooding phase, calcite spherulites in a matrix of Mgsilicates, and calcitic shrub-like growths trigged by evaporation, controlled by pH and ionic activity. METHODS This study is based on 780 samples from cores and sidewall plugs collected from five wells Fig. 2 . The applied methods include optical petrography plane-polarized light PL crossed-polarized light XPL , ultraviolet fluorescence UVF , cathodoluminescence CL , scanning electron microscopy SEM , X-ray diffraction XRD , and petrophysical JSR LACUSTRINE PRE-SALT CARBONATE RESERVOIRS FROM NORTHERN CAMPOS BASIN analysis. In order to characterize the primary and diagenetic constituents, the pore types, and their relationships, optical petrography was performed on thin sections impregnated with blue epoxy resin. 139 thin sections were quantified and described in detail, and 641 thin sections were classified according main constituents, textures, and pore types. Pore types were classified according to Choquette and Pray 1970 . Thin sections were stained for carbonate identification with an acid solution of alizarin red and potassium ferrocyanide Dickson 1965 . A Zeiss Colibri fluorescence light-emitting-diode LED UV microscope was used to evaluate presence of organic matter and relations of replacement between fluorescent minerals. In order to identify diagenetic carbonate phases, cathodoluminescence CL microscopy was performed in a Cambridge Image Technology Ltd. CITL luminoscope. CL analyses were performed in CL8200 MK5-2 equipment coupled to Leica microscope, under operating conditions of 300 mA and 17 kV. Scanning electron microscopy SEM analyses using backscattered and secondary electrons were executed in ZEISS EVO LS15 or JEOL JSM 6490LV electron microscopes, both equipped with OXFORD Inca Aztec energy-dispersed spectrometers EDS , in order to investigate paragenetic relationships between primary and diagenetic constituents, and to identify the elemental mineral composition in representative rock fragments and thin sections. X-ray diffraction XRD analyses of the clay fraction, including air-dried, glycolsaturated, and heated treatments, were used to confirm the clay-mineral species. Petrophysical analyses were performed on plugs cut from cores and on sidewall cores in order to determine porosity and permeability according to norm API RP 40 1998. Mercury injection capillary pressure MICP analyses were performed on a Micrometrics AutoPore IV 9500 equipment to determine the pore-throat size distribution of representative samples. RESULTS Petrography The studied reservoirs in the rift section are composed of massive bioclastic rudstones and grainstones coquinas , about 80 meters thick, and by stevensitic arenites that occur at the top of the section, described only in Well 4 Fig. 2 . Overlying these reservoirs, there are crusts of calcite shrubs and stevensitic claystones that occur in millimetric to decimetric intercalations. Additionally, intraclastic grainstones and rudstones of reworked spherulites and fragments of the crusts are found intercalated with the calcite crusts and stevensitic claystones. Hybrid siltstones, siliciclastic siltstones and claystones, and microbial laminites are concentrated at the top of the sag section and at the bottom of Well 2, and are not considered reservoirs. Bivalve Gastropod Rudstones and Grainstones Coquinas . The bioclastic grainstones 9 of the samples and rudstones 91 of the samples are mostly massive, poorly to well sorted, with a chaotic or subparallel fabric. The primary constituents are bioclasts of bivalves, gastropods, and ostracods. Bivalves are the main component, composing 100 of primary constituents in 64 of the samples Fig. 3A . Bivalves always occur disarticulated, and their degree of reworking is widely variable. Bivalve bioclasts are frequently broken or dissolved, and have dimensions ranging from 0.07 to 25 mm average 1 4 2.3 mm in the thin sections. Gastropods are observed in 36 of the samples and are typically whole and not abraded Fig. 3B , with preserved intraparticle porosity. The ostracod bioclasts are whole, sometimes articulated, and occasionally recrystallized. Ostracods occur in 8 of the samples and are the main primary component of grainstones Fig. 3C in two samples. Intraclasts of carbonate mud, volcanic, and siliciclastic grains occur in small amounts in the bioclastic rudstones and grainstones. 1289 Calcite is the main cement of bioclastic rudstones and grainstones. The bioclasts are covered by continuous rims of microcrystalline to prismatic calcite Fig. 3D . Drusy calcite frequently is the main interparticle cement. Dissolution of bioclasts generates intraparticle and moldic pores, which are filled by drusy Fig. 3E and blocky calcite. Subordinate cements that have filled interparticle pores include blocky, coarse mosaic, and microcrystalline calcite. Recrystallization of the bivalve and gastropod bioclasts to blocky calcite is common, masking the original fabric of the bioclastic rudstones and grainstones. Bivalves are dull CL, whilst intraparticle and interparticle cements are red in CL Fig. 3F . Bivalves and gastropods were either dissolved or neomorphosed calcitized , commonly showing a heterogeneous range from total dissolution, with variable intensity of calcite cementation of the intraparticle and moldic porosity, to total neomorphism. The distinction between neomorphism and moldic pores cementation is, in many cases, difficult without CL. Calcitization of aragonitic bivalve and gastropod bioclasts often forms a mosaic of calcite crystals marked by fine lines of inclusions delineating the original structure of the shell Fig. 3D . In contrast, the intraparticle and moldic pores were filled by drusiform Fig. 3E and blocky calcite. Dolomite occurs in 15 of the samples as a minor constituent , 5 in the bioclastic rudstones and grainstones of Wells 3 and 5 and more rarely in Well 2. Blocky and saddle dolomite fill locally interparticle, intraparticle, moldic, and vugular pores. Dolostones up to 10 meters thick occur in Well 5 as a product of replacement of the bioclastic rocks. These rocks are composed of small rhombohedral and, rarely, of saddle dolomite crystals. Sucrosic dolostones preserve partially the shape of the bioclasts Fig. 4A . Silica occurs in 44 of the samples, rarely making up more than 2 of the rock volume. Chalcedony and quartz as blocky, prismatic, coarse mosaic, and microcrystalline , often occur in small amounts, mainly replacing calcite and rarely filling interparticle, intraparticle, moldic, and vugular porosity in bioclastic rudstones and grainstones. Microcrystalline quartz rims locally cover bioclasts. Drusy quartz locally fills moldic and vugular porosity. Displacive pore-filling interparticle quartz cement was observed in 4 of the samples Fig. 4B . Bioclastic grainstones and rudstones have a poor diversity of diagenetic minerals. Barite BaSO4 and celestine SrSO4 are rare, filling interparticle porosity or replacing calcite cements and bivalves. The aluminum-phosphate-sulfate APS minerals svanbergite SrAl3 PO4 SO4 OH 6 and goyazite SrHAl3 PO4 2 OH 6 locally replace mud intraclasts Fig. 4C in bioclastic rudstones. The main pore types in bioclastic rudstones are interparticle, intraparticle, moldic, and vugular Figs. 3A, D, E, 4D, E . Bioclastic grainstones have predominantly intercrystalline and moldic porosity Figs. 3C, 4F . Dolomitized rudstones and grainstones are both rich in intercrystalline porosity Fig. 4A . Well 2 shows a cyclical variation of predominant pore types along the studied interval, from moldic to interparticle and to moldic again. The samples of Well 3 display predominance of moldic porosity, and those of Well 5, of interparticle porosity. Well 1 was not sampled in the bioclastic succession, and Well 4 was poorly sampled. Stevensitic Arenites. Massive, well to moderately sorted arenites composed of stevensitic ooids and stevensite-coated carbonate particles occur at the top of the rift section, only in Well 4, forming an interval about 50 meters thick Fig. 2 . The occurrence of these ooids is very common in the rift section of the Campos Basin. Previous studies pointed to a composition of stevensite, kerolite, and talc for such ooids Bertani and Carozzi 1985a, 1985b Rehim et al. 1986 Abraha o and Warme 1990 Armelenti et al. 2016 . These clay ooids are commonly dissolved and replaced by dolomite and quartz, and often are deformed. The diagenetic patterns of the stevensitic arenites are very heterogeneous. Frequently the ooids are cemented by dolomite or quartz, and almost completely silicified, 1290 R. HERLINGER, JR. ET AL. JSR FIG. 3. Photomicrographs of primary bioclastic composition of rudstones and grainstones and diagenetic features A poorly sorted bivalve rudstone with intraparticle porosity plane-polarized light, PL . B Neomorphosed gastropod cemented by interparticle and intraparticle pore-lining particle and discrete intraparticle later calcite PL . C Grainstone composed mainly of ostracods red arrow . Molds of dissolved bioclasts impregnated by blue epoxy resin yellow arrow PL . D Rudstone composed of neomorphosed bivalves with interparticle fine rim of pore-lining calcite red arrow black arrow indicates thin lines from original texture of bivalve shell PL . E Rudstone with dissolved bivalve molds surrounded by thin micrite envelope blue arrow cemented by drusy calcite on both moldic black arrow and interparticle porosity red arrow PL . F CL photomicrograph showing neomorphosed bivalves red arrow with dull CL interparticle pores blue arrow shows porosity lined by calcite rims white arrow and partially cemented by fine mosaic calcite red luminescence cathodoluminescence, CL . JSR LACUSTRINE PRE-SALT CARBONATE RESERVOIRS FROM NORTHERN CAMPOS BASIN 1291 FIG. 4. Common aspects of diagenesis and porosity from bivalve rudstones and grainstones A sucrosic dolostone with some molds of dissolved bioclasts PL . B Bivalve rudstone cemented by displacive silica blue arrow . Pale green rim is microporous silica impregnated by blue epoxy resin black arrow PL . C Svanbergite crystals replacing mud intraclast crossed-polarized light, XPL . D Bivalve rudstone cemented by thin pore-lining calcite with preserved interparticle porosity. Bioclasts partially neomorphosed, partially dissolved, and further cemented by calcite mosaic PL . E Core photograph showing vugs red arrow and molds blue arrow in bivalve rudstone. F Moldic porosity black arrow in bivalve grainstone. Interparticle and part of moldic porosity occluded by calcite cement PL . 1292 R. HERLINGER, JR. ET AL. JSR FIG. 5. Optical photomicrographs showing highly heterogeneous imprint of diagenesis on stevensitic arenites A partially dissolved stevensitic ooids black arrow , replaced by silica blue arrow and covered by dolomite rim red arrow PL . B Partially dissolved ooids red arrow , replaced by dolomite blue arrow and cemented by chalcedony rim and quartz mosaic white arrow XPL . C Microporous chert yellow arrow replacing stevensitic arenite with remnants of primary porosity red arrow . Microporosity is impregnated by blue epoxy resin, resulting in a pale blue color. Black arrow indicates oil inclusions in microporosity PL . D Contact between mostly silicified stevensite arenite black arrow and dolomitized arenite blue arrow . Red arrow shows prismatic quartz filling interparticle porosity XPL . dolomitized, and or dissolved Fig. 5A . Calcite is rare in the stevensitic arenites, occurring mainly as coarse mosaic fracture-filling cement. Authigenic silica lines ooids as fibrous and microcrystalline rims, followed by pore-filling fine- to coarse-crystalline, drusy mosaic Fig. 5B . Partial to total replacement of ooids by microcrystalline silica is frequent Fig. 5C, D . Microcrystalline silica, as botryoidal or drusy aggregates, fills vugular, interparticle, and fracture pores. Botryoidal chalcedony has small brown inclusions and green to blue UV fluorescence. Microcrystalline silica has abundant microporosity and fracturing. Blocky or mosaic dolomite replaces ooids Figs. 5B , and drusy dolomite fills interparticle porosity, and occurs as pore-lining rims Fig. 5A, D . In some cases, dolomite occurs only selectively replacing the ooids, while in other cases it occurs only filling the interparticle pores. Pervasive dolomitization, mimetic or totally fabric obliterative, is common. Rarely, saddle dolomite replaces diagenetic silica. CL images indicate zoned red luminescence patterns on dolomite crystals. Dolomite fluoresces dark to light blue, and light green under UV. Millimetric to centimetric levels of pervasively dolomitized or silicified arenites occur intercalated, through stylolitic contacts, heterogeneously organized. Traces of fluorite, svanbergite goyazite, and pyrite occur replacing silica. Moldic and intraparticle porosity due to dissolution of ooids Figs. 5A and intercrystalline porosity due to dolomitization are the most common pore types in stevensitic arenites. Interparticle porosity is reduced by cementation and compaction, but remnants of primary porosity were observed in a few samples Fig. 5C . Silicified arenites have significant microporosity Fig. 5C and localized vugs. Stevensitic Claystones with Calcite Spherulites. The deposits of magnesian clays of the sag section were often replaced by calcite spherulites Fig. 6A , dolomite, and silica. Due to chemical instability of the Mg-clays, their original fabric is difficult to identify. These clay deposits are more abundant in Well 4, where they are preserved in an interval about one hundred meters thick. In the other wells, Mg-clay deposits were extensively replaced. Mg-clays are pale to dark brown in uncrossed polarizers, occurring as laminated or massive aggregates Fig. 6B , as peloids with very variable size Fig. 6C , as ooids with up to 2 mm of diameter, as thin coatings covering intraclasts Fig. 6D , as JSR LACUSTRINE PRE-SALT CARBONATE RESERVOIRS FROM NORTHERN CAMPOS BASIN 1293 FIG. 6. Important characteristics of stevensitic claystones A shrunken and partially dissolved yellow arrow stevensite laminations red arrow replaced by recrystallized calcite spherulites black arrow PL . B Slightly shrunken stevensite Mg-clay laminated aggregates, partially replaced by dolomite Dol and calcite Cal backscattered electrons image, BSE . C Stevensite ooid peloid. Ooid on the left has a partially dissolved nucleus and an outer massive texture, whereas peloid on the right has a dominantly massive texture BSE . D Stevensite as ooids black arrow and as coatings yellow arrow on intraclasts ultra-violet fluorescence, UVF . E Laminated stevensite aggregates white arrow partially replaced by dolomite red arrow UVF . F Articulated ostracod bioclast shells red arrow filled and replaced by quartz in deformed stevensite laminations replaced by mimetic dolomite white arrow PL . 1294 R. HERLINGER, JR. ET AL. pseudomatrix, and as matrix in hybrid siltstones and in intraclastic packstones. Laminated and massive aggregates often show shrinkage cracks. Clay peloids and ooids are often deformed. Even when partially dissolved or replaced by carbonates or silica, clay particles and laminated aggregates are blue, yellow, and light brown to orange UV fluorescent Fig. 6D, E . SEM analyses show poor crystallinity, even at high magnification. Semiquantitative EDS analyses indicate considerable amounts of SiO2 about 65 and MgO about 30 , and low contents of Al2O3 about 2 . FeO, K2O, CaO, and NaO2 occur in amounts below 1 . The elemental composition of the clays and their XRD analysis indicate that the dominant mineral is stevensite. Silt- to sand-size siliciclastic grains are sparsely mixed with the stevensite deposits, usually in less than 1 . Hybrid sandstones and siltstones with quartz, biotite, muscovite, orthoclase, and plagioclase grains are rare. Hybrid siltstones are particularly abundant at the base of the sag section in Well 2, within an interval about 100 meters thick and at the top of the sag section in all wells Fig. 2 . Phosphatic bioclasts, such as fish scales, teeth, vertebrae, and other bones, occur scattered or concentrated, being common in Well 1, locally together with other phosphatic grains. Ostracods are frequently concentrated in the laminations Fig. 6F , and occur articulated, with limited reworking. Their partial to total replacement by quartz or dolomite is common in 34 of samples . Calcite spherulites are the most common diagenetic constituent in the stevensite deposits, occurring as an important component in all studied wells Figs. 6A, 7A, B . Spherulites 0.15 to 2.5 mm in diameter average 1 4 0.8 mm frequently replaced the stevensitic claystones and hybrid siltstones, displacing and deforming the unconsolidated sediments Figs. 6A, 7B . Few spherulites have recognizable nuclei made of clay peloids, ostracods, intraclasts, and lumps of microcrystalline calcite. Spherulites are abundant, coalescing as irregular levels Fig. 7B , sutured by microstylolites. Although the spherulites were recrystallized, resulting in changes in crystal shape and size, many have good preservation of the original fibrous structure Fig. 7A, C . Partial replacement of the spherulites by chalcedony and quartz is frequent 31 of the samples . Spherical to subspherical low-magnesium calcite pisoliths 1 mm to 5 cm are abundant in Well 1 Fig. 2 , showing fascicular-optic and or radialfibrous texture, similar to crusts, but with concentric growth Fig. 7D . Some pisoliths are formed by thin concentric laminae 0.5 mm , while others are formed by divergent coalescence of fascicular-optic calcite aggregates, reaching up to 2 mm in diameter. The pisoliths are deformed and recrystallized. Pisolithic aggregates are not fluorescent and seem to replace stevensite like spherulites inside unconsolidated sediments. Dolomite replaces stevensite in nearly all the samples Figs. 6B, E, F, 7A, B . Stevensite laminae are replaced and deformed by blocky dolomite Figs. 6B, 7A . Saddle dolomite replaces the primary and diagenetic constituents in 12 of the samples. Dolomite frequently totally replaces the stevensite and calcite spherulites. In the hybrid siltstones, authigenic illite smectite clays are identified in XRD. Intercalations of millimetric to centimetric levels of cherts and dolostones, along stylolitic contacts, are formed by replacement of laminated clay deposits. Dolomite fluoresces blue, green, yellow, or brown under UVF Fig. 6E , while silica is brown to green under UVF when replacing stevensite. Cubic, blocky, and microcrystalline pyrite, although scarce , 1 , occurs in most of the described thin sections, mainly replacing the stevensite and other primary or diagenetic constituents. Pseudocubic, microcrystalline svanbergite goyazite SrAl3 PO4 SO4 OH 6 SrHAl3 PO4 2 OH 6 are recognized in SEM analyses, associated with silicification and dolomitization. Partial to total dissolution of stevensite is very common Fig. 7E, F . Microporosity is observed both by NMR nuclear magnetic resonance and SEM analyses in preserved stevensite deposits. JSR Fascicular Calcite Crusts. Non-magnesian calcite crusts of radialfibrous and more commonly fascicular-optic crystal aggregates sensu Kendall 1977 i.e., plumose or increasingly divergent constitute the main reservoirs of the sag section. These calcite aggregates grew predominantly in a vertical to near vertical orientation Fig. 8A, B , with an average individual length of 1.55 mm up to 12 mm , encrusting various deposits. The fascicular aggregates commonly display a shrub shape that coalesces both vertically and horizontally, forming calcite crusts of variable thickness, up to 80 cm thick. In some cases, fibrous calcite aggregates form millimetric continuous and isopachous palisade crusts Fig. 8C , intercalated with microcrystalline calcite or dolomite, siliciclastic mud, or stevensite laminae. Recrystallization is frequent, generating apparently massive forms, although with remnants of the original fibrous crystal fabric recognizable in polarized light and in SEM images Fig. 8D . The engulfment and replacement of siliciclastic grains, stevensite peloids, and ostracod bioclasts by fascicular-optic calcite aggregates is common. In some cases, thin laminations occur within the aggregates. CL images show a homogeneous red luminescence pattern Fig. 9A , and UVF is very weak or absent. Microbial remnants were not identified in SEM analyses. Dolomite is the most common diagenetic constituent filling interstitial growth-framework pores in calcite crusts 78 of the samples Fig. 9B, C , with blocky, microcrystalline and more rarely mosaic habits. Saddle dolomite occurs filling growth-framework and vugular porosity, as well as replacing the primary and diagenetic constituents. Partial to total dolomitization of the original deposits is common, in some cases mimetic Fig. 9D , and in other cases destroying the original fabrics. Dolomite shows red-zonation CL patterns. Calcite fills the growth-framework porosity in 31 of the samples. Rarely, calcite rims of scalenohedral, prismatic, and bladed crystals cover calcite fascicular aggregates 6 of the samples . Partial or total recrystallization of fascicular aggregates to microcrystalline calcite is common. Authigenic fibrous and microcrystalline silica selectively replaces fascicular calcite crusts in 92 of the samples Figs. 9A, B, E and fills growth-framework porosity in 42 of the samples. Pervasive replacement by microcrystalline silica commonly promotes the formation of microporosity and or vugular porosity. Coarse mosaic or prismatic quartz locally replaces the fascicular aggregates and fills the growth-framework porosity. Coarse mosaic, prismatic, or radial-fibrous barite and celestine were described in 11 of the samples, filling fractures or growth-framework porosity Fig. 9C . Authigenic non-magnesian clay minerals are not significant in volume, but occur very frequently in the studied samples. Illite, illite smectite, and kaolinite clays identified in SEM Fig. 9F and XRD, occur in the calcite crusts, mainly replacing detrital interstitial components. Growth-framework porosity in the interstices among coalescent fascicular calcite aggregates constitutes the main type of primary porosity in calcite crusts Fig. 8A . These pores are enlarged by dissolution of the aggregates Figs. 8A, 9B, C . Dolomite cement is the main reducer of growth-framework porosity Figs. 9B . Compaction does not significantly affect growth-framework porosity. Intracrystalline porosity in calcite crust and dolomite crystals that filled growth-framework porosity is common Figs. 9B, C, E . Intraclastic Grainstones, Rudstones, and Clay-Rich Packstones. Massive intraclastic grainstones and rudstones, composed of fragments of reworked calcite crusts, stevensitic claystones intraclasts and particles, calcite spherulites, laminated microbial carbonates, and microcrystalline calcite peloids are common Fig. 10A D . The average diameter of such particles is 1.56 mm up to 25 mm . Calcite intraclasts are commonly rounded, with shapes controlled either by their internal crystal habit or by their laminated fabrics. Mg-clay matrix is a common constituent in intraclastic rocks Fig. 10B . Rocks with this combined composition were termed clay-rich packstones or hybrid packstones . JSR LACUSTRINE PRE-SALT CARBONATE RESERVOIRS FROM NORTHERN CAMPOS BASIN 1295 FIG. 7. Aspects related to replacement and dissolution of stevensitic claystones. A Slightly silicified spherulites red arrow in a clay matrix replaced by dolomite yellow arrow XPL . B Partially silicified spherulites red arrow , displacing and replacing clay laminae yellow arrow . Dolomite is interpreted as a result of mimetic replacement of stevensite XPL . C Radial-fibrous structure of a calcite spherulite, interpreted as original secondary electrons image, SEI . D Core photograph of calcite pisoids red arrow replacing stevensite further replaced by dolomite yellow arrow . E Matrix dissolution porosity blue epoxy resin among dolomite rhombs black arrow and calcite spherulites blue arrow . Lamination marked by undissolved brown organic matter lines red arrow . Note, also, partial dissolution of calcite spherulites PL . F Partially dissolved red arrow magnesian clay black arrow , replaced by calcite blue arrow stained with acid solution of alizarin red and potassium ferrocyanide PL . 1296 R. HERLINGER, JR. ET AL. JSR FIG. 8. Aspects of fascicular-optic calcite crusts A, B divergent crystal aggregate optic axes with fascicular-optic texture yellow arrow , growth-framework pore enlarged by dissolution white arrow , and dolomite pore filling PL, XPL . C Isopachous fibrous fascicular-optic calcite palisade crusts white arrow intercalated with replacive dolomite yellow arrow XPL . D Detail of the mimetic recrystallization of fibrous calcite, showing significant amount of micropores SEI . JSR LACUSTRINE PRE-SALT CARBONATE RESERVOIRS FROM NORTHERN CAMPOS BASIN 1297 FIG. 9. Detail of diagenetic modifications of fascicular-optic calcite crust A calcite Cal shrub with massive recrystallization and replacement by quartz Qzo . Note the homogeneous luminescence pattern in calcite CL . B Calcite Cal crust partially replaced by microcrystalline quartz Qzo and with growth-framework porosity partially cemented by zoned dolomite Dol . Dolomite exhibits intracrystalline dissolution. BSE . C Quartz, celestine, barite, and dolomite filling growth-framework enlarged porosity and replacing calcite crust. Note partial dissolution of dolomite rhombs BSE . D Dolomite mosaic replacing fascicular-optic calcite XPL . E Detail of the internal structure of a fascicular-optic calcite Cal aggregate, replaced by quartz Qzo and showing abundant intracrystalline porosity BSE . F Illite smectite IS covering dolomite Dol filling growth-framework porosity SEI . 1298 R. HERLINGER, JR. ET AL. JSR FIG. 10. Aspects of intraclastic rocks A intraclastic rudstones partially cemented by calcite Cal PL . B Clay-rich packstone composed of carbonate intraclasts in a clay matrix PL . C Intraclastic grainstone composed of calcite spherulites red arrow , fragments of fascicular-optic calcite yellow arrow , and microcrystalline calcitic intraclasts blue arrow , cemented by calcite black arrow PL . D Intraclastic rudstone with primary interparticle porosity and secondary porosity generated by particle dissolution impregnated with blue epoxy resin PL . Dolomite fills interparticle pores in 81 of the samples of intraclastic grainstones and rudstones. Saddle dolomite is a common interparticle cement. Blocky, microcrystalline, and or coarse mosaic calcite occurs as cement filling interparticle pores in 100 of the samples Fig. 10A . Calcite rims of scalenohedral, prismatic, and bladed crystals cover the intraclasts in 25 of the samples. Silica replaces carbonate intraclasts in 62 of the samples. Coarse mosaic or prismatic quartz occasionally replaces intraclastic grainstones 19 of the samples . Mechanical compaction of the intraclastic rocks revealed by grain fracturing and deformation, and chemical compaction through pressure dissolution along interparticle contacts or stylolites is frequently intense. Porosity enhancement by particle dissolution is frequent Fig. 10D . Primary interparticle and secondary moldic porosity are reduced by mechanical and chemical compaction and by cementation Fig. 10C . often brecciated and dominated by the precipitation of dolomite up to 100 of volume and quartz Fig. 11B . Fine idiotopic dolomite around 50 lm and saddle dolomite Fig. 11C crystals are dominant, frequently dissolved or broken. Prismatic quartz replaces and engulfs dolomite up to 35 of volume . Celestine occurs as small prismatic or fibrous crystals filling fractures and replacing dolomite Fig. 11D . Coarse calcite fracture filling was observed in one sample. Traces of svanbergite goyazite pseudocubic crystals occur replacing dolomites Fig. 11E . Fault- and fracture-related alteration generated highly porous dolostones with intercrystalline porosity enlarged by dolomite dissolution Fig. 11F and with porosity enhanced by open fractures. Processes Related to Faults and Fractures. Alterations associated with faults and fractures affect various facies and occur more expressively in an interval approximately 10 m thick in well 2 Fig. 11A , just above the unconformity separating the rift stage from the sag stage. Fractures occur open or filled with quartz, calcite, dolomite, celestine, and or other minerals, such as pyrite, barite, anhydrite, kaolinite, fluorite, and sphalerite. These alterations generate highly complex and heterogeneous textures, The overall porosity ranges between 0.1 and 37 average 1 4 7.67 , and the average permeability is 16.241 mD maximum 1 4 1193 mD . About 40 of the samples are not considered reservoirs, including stevensitic claystones, hybrid siltstones, microbial laminites, pisolithic rudstones, clay-rich packstones, cherts, and sparites, which usually have low porosities and permeabilities , 0.001 mD . Table 1 summarizes basic petrophysical results of the main rock types. Pore throat sizes obtained Porosity, Permeability, and Mercury Injection Capillary Pressure MICP JSR LACUSTRINE PRE-SALT CARBONATE RESERVOIRS FROM NORTHERN CAMPOS BASIN 1299 FIG. 11. Aspects of alteration related to fracturing A core photograph of semi-consolidated brecciated dolostone with centimetric clasts black arrow , open fractures red arrow , and fractures filled by celestine blue arrow . B Partially dissolved saddle dolomite red arrow , partially replaced and engulfed by quartz crystals black arrow PL . C Saddle dolomite red arrow within cataclastic fabric partially replaced by quartz XPL . D Celestine black arrow and calcite blue arrow filling fractures in brecciated dolostone red arrow PL . E Prismatic quartz red arrow and svanbergite goyazite pseudocubic crystals yellow arrow replacing cataclastic dolomite PL . F Small fractured dolomite rhombs black arrow replaced by quartz red arrow and svanbergite yellow arrow . Intercrystalline porosity impregnated by blue epoxy resin PL . 1300 JSR R. HERLINGER, JR. ET AL. TABLE 1. Statistical summary of petrophysical analysis, showing the parameters of porosity and permeability of main defined petrofacies. Bioclastic Rudstones Petrofacies Interparticle Predominant Pore Type Average Median Standard Deviation Variance Kurtosis Range Minimum Maximum n 8.68 7.209 8.60 1.760 2.34 15.348 5.46 235.548 1.10 13.235 12.80 74.699 1.80 , 0.001 14.60 74.700 45 45 Coalescent Crust Growth-framework Petrofacies k mD Moldic k mD Bioclastic Grainstones Stevensitic Arenites Moldic Multiple Types Vug k mD k mD k mD 10.32 1.055 9.60 0.198 4.27 2.427 18.20 5.888 4.58 11.087 20.70 10.299 5.10 , 0.001 25.80 10.300 31 31 Non Coalescent Crust 7.91 0.142 7.20 0.078 2.85 0.185 8.13 0.034 1.58 4.024 12.30 0.759 2.80 , 0.001 15.10 0.760 27 27 Intraclastic Rocks 14.46 14.65 3.21 10.28 0.81 11.40 8.50 19.90 18 1.540 0.561 1.961 3.846 1.006 5.951 0.019 5.970 18 Dolostones 18.74 17.95 7.22 52.18 0.57 26.10 5.10 31.20 18 21.400 0.432 62.825 3947.036 15.983 266.999 , 0.001 267.000 18 Intercrystalline Interparticle Intercrystalline All Samples Predominant Pore Type k mD k mD k mD k mD k mD Average Median Standard Deviation Variance Kurtosis Range Minimum Maximum n 6.85 7.00 4.09 16.69 1.25 15.90 0.20 16.10 105 28.937 0.435 64.646 4179.164 6.818 294.999 , 0.001 295.000 105 6.14 5.50 3.47 12.07 1.14 12.30 1.30 13.60 67 0.809 0.055 2.400 5.759 28.798 16.199 , 0.001 16.200 67 6.34 6.00 4.68 21.91 0.57 18.90 0.10 19.00 77 10.445 0.010 61.224 3748.384 66.974 522.999 , 0.001 523.000 77 15.80 15.55 7.43 55.19 0.31 31.10 1.30 32.40 40 111.040 32.000 229.450 52647.488 15.590 1192.999 , 0.001 1193.000 40 7.67 6.80 5.76 33.14 2.77 36.90 0.10 37.00 599 16.241 0.074 77.137 5950.070 124.215 1192.999 , 0.001 1193.000 599 through MICP analyses were classified according to the Hassall et al. 2004 classification micro pores pore throats less than 0.5 lm meso pores pore throats between 0.5 lm and 5 lm macro pores pore throats more than 5 lm . The average pore throat is 4.92 lm median 1 4 3.03 lm , and the distribution of pore sizes shows slight predominance of mesoporosity micro 1 4 33.19 meso 1 4 39.08 macro 1 4 27.73 . Bioclastic Rudstones. The permeability of bioclastic rudstones varies significantly according to the predominant type of porosity. The porosity of rudstones with predominance of interparticle porosity varies between 1.8 and 14.6 average 1 4 8.68 and average permeability is 7.2 mD maximum 1 4 74.7 mD . Rudstones with predominant moldic and intraparticle porosity have higher porosities than those with predominantly interparticle porosity average 1 4 10.32 5.1 25.8 , but lower permeability average 1 4 1.1 mD , 0.001 10.3 mD . Rudstones with predominant vugular porosity have the lowest permeability and porosity values average 1 4 7.91 2.8 15.1 average permeability 1 4 0.14 mD , 0.001 0.76 mD . MICP analyses of bioclastic rudstones and grainstones showed average pore throats of 4.92 lm median 1 4 3.77 lm with multiple modes, reflecting the heterogeneity of the porous system. The distribution of pore sizes shows predominance of microporosity micro 1 4 47.1 meso 1 4 28.7 macro 1 4 24.2 . Bioclastic Grainstones. The porosity of bioclastic grainstones ranges between 8.5 and 19.9 average 1 4 14.46 and their average permeability is 1.54 mD 0.019 5.97 mD . Mesoporosity largely predominates micro 1 4 20.85 meso 1 4 60.65 macro 1 4 18.50 , with average pore throat of 3.25 lm median 1 4 2.33lm . Stevensitic Arenites. Stevensitic arenites have significant variability in porous types, as previously described, which corresponds to the large variation in porosity and permeability. Their porosity varies between 5.1 and 31.2 average 1 4 18.74 , and the average permeability is 21.4 mD , 0.001 267 mD . MICP showed average pore throat of 6.02 lm median 1 4 2.87 lm . The distribution of pore sizes shows predominance of macroporosity micro 1 4 29.05 meso 1 4 28.50 macro 1 4 42.55 . Coalescent Fascicular Calcite Crusts. Well-developed coalescent calcite crusts have porosities ranging between 0.20 and 16.10 average 1 4 6.85 and average permeability of 28.94 mD , 0.001 295 mD . MICP showed average pore throat of 7.77 lm median 1 4 4.31 lm . The distribution of pore sizes shows predominance of microporosity micro 1 4 37.50 meso 1 4 31.00 macro 1 4 31.50 . Non-Coalescent Fascicular Calcite Crusts. Poorly developed noncoalescent crusts, with porosity dominantly developed by stevensite dissolution, have porosity between 1.30 and 13.6 average 1 4 6.14 and average permeability of 0.8 mD , 0.001 16.2 mD . Microporosity predominates micro 1 4 50.94 meso 1 4 40.49 macro 1 4 8.57 , with average pore throat of 1.96 lm median 1 4 0.64 lm . Intraclastic Grainstones, Rudstones, and Clay-Rich Packstones. Intraclastic grainstones and rudstones have average porosities of 6.34 0.1 19 and average permeability of 10.45 mD , 0.001 523 mD . Dolostones. Dolostones have the highest porosity and permeability among the recognized rock types, with porosity ranging between 1.3 and 32.4 average 1 4 15.80 and maximum permeability reaching 1193 mD average 1 4 111.04 mD . MICP showed average pore throat of 5.59 lm median 1 4 4.27lm . The distribution of pore sizes shows predominance of mesoporosity micro 1 4 13.67 meso 1 4 45.17 macro 1 4 42.16 . JSR LACUSTRINE PRE-SALT CARBONATE RESERVOIRS FROM NORTHERN CAMPOS BASIN DISCUSSION Eogenetic Evolution of Bivalve Gastropod Rudstones and Grainstones Most of the diagenesis of the bioclastic rocks occurred before compaction Fig. 12 , as evidenced by the distribution of the blocky and drusiform interparticle pore-filling cements. The bioclastic rocks followed three main evolution pathways, controlled by distinct eogenetic conditions Fig. 13 . Pathway 1 was probably connected to active circulation of interstitial fluids undersaturated with respect to aragonite, most likely lacustrine freshwaters during more humid periods, which promoted intense dissolution of the aragonitic bivalves cf. Morse and Mackenzie 1990 Moore and Wade 2013 , and the precipitation of calcite prismatic rims in interparticle and intraparticle pores Fig. 3E . Pathway 2 was promoted probably where less dilute fluids initially allowed preservation of the bioclasts cf. James and Choquette 1984 Caron and Nelson 2009 , and precipitation of calcite prismatic rims and drusiform cement, followed by extensive dissolution of bioclasts and generation of moldic porosity Fig. 4F . Pathway 3 developed where limited circulation of fluids slightly supersaturated with respect to aragonite favored the precipitation of thin calcite rims, the neomorphism of the bioclasts Fig. 3D , and the preservation of interparticle porosity. The common alternation of intervals with predominance of neomorphism and of dissolution indicates frequent oscillation between these interpreted environmental conditions. Such diagenetic variations may be related to climatic control of the composition and level of lacustrine waters, or to tectonically driven hydraulic gradients, probably related to faulting along the rift margins, generating patterns that cannot be correlated among the studied wells. This paragenetic evolution of the bioclastic rudstones and grainstones Fig. 12 differs from that of equivalent rocks from the central and southern parts of the basin, where there is a predominance of aragonite neomorphism in relation to dissolution Bertani and Carozzi 1985b Altenhofen 2013 Muniz 2014 Goldberg et al 2017 . Typical vadose features, such as pendant or meniscus cements cf. James and Choquette 1984 , infiltration of clay and or silt, and development of soils and calcretes were not observed in the bioclastic rocks, indicating that exposure was not significant in the succession. The locally observed displacive silica cementation of bioclastic rocks was therefore not related to the formation of silcretes under subaerial arid conditions Ross and Chiarenzelli 1985 Khalaf 1988 Hesse 1989 Murray 1990 . Since the bioclastic deposits are poor in siliciclastic grains, such early silica precipitation was probably derived from dissolution of the stevensitic ooids. Origin and Diagenesis of Stevensite Recent studies indicate that Mg-clays are formed from Si-Mg hydrated gel precursors Tosca and Wright 2014 Wright and Barnett 2015 , which evolve to stevensite, kerolite, talc, and other Mg-clay mineral phases in highly alkaline lacustrine and palustrine environments Rehim et al. 1986 Pozo and Casas 1999 . Experimental studies show that this evolution depends on a number of environmental factors, including pH, salinity, temperature, and ionic content Jones 1986 Tosca and Masterson 2014 . The alkaline conditions needed for stevensite precipitation ph 10 were recurrent during the rift evolution, as stevensite arenites occur in different stages and areas of the Campos rift Bertani and Carozzi 1985a, 1985b Armelenti et al. 2016 Goldberg et al. 2017 . These conditions were very different from the fresh-water environments colonized by bivalves and gastropods. The common mixture of stevensite ooids and peloids with bivalve bioclasts in the Campos Basin rift section indicates their extensive gravitational resedimentation in deeper lacustrine environments throughout the evolution of the rift Goldberg et al. 2017 . Pozo and Casas 1999 suggested that gel coagulation would result in granular clay particles, which could explain the common peloidal habit of 1301 stevensite. The habit of stevensite could be related to the energy of its depositional environment, as observed for glauconite, berthierine, and other syngenetic clay minerals e.g., Van Houten and Purucker 1984 Odin 1988 . As for these clays, the stevensitic ooids were probably formed in environments with some agitation by waves or currents, while the laminated stevensitic claystones were certainly deposited in low-energy environments. The peloids were probably formed in environments of an energy level between that for the formation of the ooids and that for the laminated claystones. According to Tosca and Wright 2015 , the high sensitivity to pCO2, pH, and the fast dissolution kinetics due to the high specific surface area favors the eogenetic dissolution of Mg-clays. The common dissolution and replacement of stevensite by silica and dolomite probably occurred mostly during eodiagenesis Fig. 12 , controlled by variations in the chemistry of the lacustrine waters. As observed in other rift lakes e.g., Renaut et al. 1986 De Wet et al. 2002 , dilution of lake waters during more humid periods, or input of CO2 by magmatic and hydrothermal activity, may have promoted the dissolution of Mg-clays, liberating silica and magnesium, and favoring the precipitation of silica and dolomite. Further dissolution of stevensite ooids and peloids after cementation generated abundant moldic and intraparticle porosity Fig. 5 . Intense dissolution, silicification, and dolomitization are observed in stevensitic arenites just below the pre-Alagoas regional unconformity, suggesting alteration in a subaerial environment during post-rift uplift and exposure. Genesis of Calcite Spherulites The most abundant eogenetic constituent replacing stevensite are spherulites of calcite, which occur throughout the sag succession Figs. 6A, 7A, B . The formation of spherulites has been interpreted to be favored in the interior of inorganic gels, although the viscous medium is not a prerequisite for spherulite growth Beck and Andreassen 2010 Shtukenberg et al. 2012 . Our petrographic evidence shows that the development of spherulites occurred inside the stevensite laminations or the hybrid siltstones, displacing and replacing the original unconsolidated sediment, suggesting early diagenetic conditions. Laboratory studies have reported that the development of calcite spherulites is favored in alkaline conditions with high concentrations of silica and magnesium Garc a-Ruiz 2000 Meister et al. 2011 , which agrees with the interpreted alkaline lacustrine environment. Most of the spherulites show no visible nuclei, and some display stevensite peloids, siliciclastic grains, and ostracod bioclasts as nuclei. Natural and synthetic spherulites interpreted as formed by direct microbial activity Braissant et al. 2003 Spadafora et al. 2010 have submicrometric dimensions, differing significantly from those found in the pre-salt rocks. Formation and Evolution of Fascicular Calcite Crusts Fascicular calcite crusts are interpreted as syngenetic or synsedimentary precipitates, encrusting many different deposits. The absence of clotted and cryptocrystalline textures, as well as of irregular branching structures, characteristic of the mineralization of benthic microbial communities cf. Burne and Moore 1987 Riding 2000 , and the continuous fibrous crystal fabric of the fascicular crusts, indicate that they are not microbialites sensu Burne and Moore 1987 , but rather a product of abiotic precipitation. A chemical, abiotic precipitation has been interpreted for texturally equivalent deposits in travertines cf. Chafetz and Guidry 1999 Fouke 2011 , stromatolites cf. Grotzinger and Knoll 1995 1999 Riding 2008 Pope et al. 2000 , alkaline-saline lakes cf. Jones and Renaut 1994 Warren 2006 , and, more recently, for the pre-salt reservoirs themselves Wright and Barnett 2015 . Additionally, the absence of luminescence of the fascicular calcite suggests a low content of organic matter inclusions in the aggregates. The fascicular calcite aggregates precipitated not only 1302 R. HERLINGER, JR. ET AL. JSR FIG. 12. Diagenetic sequences interpreted for the studied rock types. Thicker lines correspond to more significant processes and products, whilst dashed lines correspond to less intense processes and products. JSR LACUSTRINE PRE-SALT CARBONATE RESERVOIRS FROM NORTHERN CAMPOS BASIN 1303 FIG. 13. Schematic diagenetic pathways of bioclastic rudstones and grainstones, showing the impact of diagenetic process and products on porosity preservation, enhancement, and destruction and their resulting impact on permeability. 1304 JSR R. HERLINGER, JR. ET AL. encrusting diverse sediments, particularly the background stevensitic deposits, but also partially replacing them. This is indicated by the common occurrence of clay laminations, peloids, and other particles in the interstitial spaces, and as inclusions in the aggregates. The truncation of clay laminations by fascicular calcite aggregates is common, indicating that they grew as early diagenetic replacement. The combined evidence indicates that the precipitation of syngenetic calcite crusts and of stevensite was chemically controlled by the dynamic evolution of the lacustrine environmental conditions. Stevensite precipitated under high concentrations of silica and magnesium and low pCO2, while calcite precipitation was favored by less concentrated fluids related to less arid periods, and or by degassing after pCO2 input from magmatic and or hydrothermal activity. The paragenetic relationships of calcite crusts with stevensite and the main evolution pathways are illustrated in Figure 14. Where calcite precipitation predominated, the development of coalesced fascicular shrubs formed interstitial growth-framework porosity, with variable amounts of trapped clastic and stevensitic particles. The dissolution of stevensite released magnesium and silica, which resulted in replacement of calcite shrubs by silica and dolomite cement partially or totally filling the growthframework porosity. In other cases, the growth-framework pores were enlarged by dissolution of the fascicular aggregates. Where calcite precipitation was less extensive, discontinuous, non-coalesced calcite crusts were formed, intercalated laterally and vertically by stevensite. Stevensite deposits were heterogeneously replaced by calcite spherulites, and by dolomite. The dissolution of stevensite among spherulites locally generated porosity, but seldom reservoirs, as dolomite commonly cemented the secondary porosity generated by stevensite dissolution. Diagenesis of the Intraclastic Grainstones and Rudstones Two main patterns of eogenetic evolution, defined by the relationship between compaction and cementation, were recognized in the intraclastic grainstones and rudstones formed by fragmentation of the calcite crusts and reworking of spherulites and stevensitic particles Fig. 15 . 1 Rocks with limited eogenetic cementation were affected by mechanical and chemical compaction, followed by mesogenetic calcite cementation Fig. 10C . 2 Partial, heterogeneous eogenetic cementation by calcite or dolomite promoted the preservation of interparticle primary porosity, inhibiting pressure dissolution. The porosity was heterogeneously enlarged by dissolution of the intraclasts Fig. 10D . Some samples display abundant eogenetic precipitation of displacive silica, which filled the porosity and inhibited the mesogenetic processes. Clay-rich packstones formed by intraclasts and clay matrix Fig. 10B locally show early dissolution of the matrix, enabling a diagenetic evolution similar to that observed in the grainstones and rudstones Fig. 15 . Figure 12 shows the paragenesis of the intraclastic grainstones and rudstones. Dolomite Dolomite occurs very frequently in the studied pre-salt rocks, especially in the sag section, with various morphologies and timings. At least five major phases of dolomite precipitation were identified. Early dolomite grew inside unconsolidated stevensite laminae, visibly displacing the sediment Fig. 6E . A microbial origin for these early dolomites is unlikely, since the mechanism of dolomite precipitation by sulfate-reducing bacteria proposed by McKenzie and Vasconcelos 2009 would not be effective in lacustrine environments with low sulfate, as evidenced by the absence of pyrite framboids or of primary and or eogenetic sulfates. The formation of early dolomite was probably directly related to the dissolution of stevensite, although it may have been favored also by the dehydration of magnesium complexes promoted by the carboxylated surfaces of the organic matter present in the stevensite Roberts et al. 2013 . A second type of dolomite occurrence corresponds to a mimetic replacement of stevensite laminations Fig. 7B , which is normally not associated with porosity generation. A third type of dolomite occurs as pore filling on sag deposits, cementing calcite crusts and intraclastic rocks. Pre-compaction dolomite cementation on intraclastic grainstones and rudstones suggests an early eogenetic origin for dolomite pore filling. A fourth pattern of dolomitization corresponds to the pervasive replacement of the rock Fig. 4A , common in both the rift bioclastic rocks and in the deposits of the sag stage. This dolomitization pattern frequently occurs associated with silicification and fracturing, and with the generation of porosity, which may be related to circulation of hydrothermal fluids. The fifth type corresponds to the saddle dolomite Fig. 11C , which occurs frequently associated with fracturing. Saddle dolomite is a common mesogenetic constituent in carbonate and clastic rocks Spo tl and Pitman 1998 , and is not by itself indicative of hydrothermal alteration. However, its association with intense fracturing in some of the studied rocks suggests hydrothermal influence. Hydrothermal and Mesogenetic Alterations The term hydrothermal has been defined in different ways, generally to characterize changes related to hot-water circulation. Machel 2002 suggests that the term should be used only to identify minerals that are formed at temperatures higher than those of the host rocks, regardless of the origin and composition of the fluids. In this sense, the identification of hydrothermal alteration would require isotopic and fluid-inclusion analyses, or the presence of exotic mineralogy formed at high temperatures. The presence of saddle dolomite does not define hydrothermal alteration, since it can be formed at common burial temperatures and conditions, as previously discussed. However, there are occurrences in the studied succession that are characterized by intense fracturing, dissolution, silicification, dolomitization, as well as concentration of barite, fluorite, kaolinite or dickite, pyrite, and other sulfides. These alterations could be promoted by the focused circulation of deep-sourced fluids, which generated distinct hydrothermal alterations. Recently, Alvarenga et al. 2016 recognized multiple hydrothermal vents in the rift section of central Campos Basin. Although lacking sampling of the most affected intervals, areas with intense dissolution were interpreted in the well logs and formation tests as probably related to hypogenic hydrothermal karst cf. Dublyansky 1995 Heward et al. 2000 . Such areas may be extremely important for fluid flow and hydrocarbon production. Mesogenetic dissolution has not created a significant volume of porosity in the studied reservoirs. Vuggy porosity occurs erratically along the studied reservoirs in several facies. These vugs are interpreted to have been formed during mesodiagenesis by dissolution of primary and eogenetic constituents, since typical eogenetic cements are not observed filling these pore types. Such dissolution may have been generated by acidic pore waters derived from the rift shales Racey et al. 2001 Beavington-Penney et al. 2008 . Although exotic minerals, such as epidotes, prehnite, amphiboles, and metallic sulfides, were not observed in channel and vugular porosity, the influence of hydrothermal fluids on mesogenetic dissolution at pore scale cannot be ruled out. Celestine, barite, and anhydrite occasionally occur as late cements filling primary and secondary porosity and or replacing primary and diagenetic constituents. As these minerals are commonly related to fractured intervals, their precipitation was probably connected with the circulation of deep fluids, although they could be locally influenced by the dissolution of overlying evaporites. The occurrence of aluminum phosphate-sulfate APS minerals is not indicative of any specific genetic environment, occurring in a wide diversity of geological settings, including sedimentary carbonates and siliciclastics , igneous, and metamorphic rocks Dill 2001 . Traces of svanbergite goyazite occur replacing mud intraclasts in the bioclastic reservoirs and are associated with silicification, dolomitization, and fracturing in other facies in sag deposits. Specific geochemical JSR LACUSTRINE PRE-SALT CARBONATE RESERVOIRS FROM NORTHERN CAMPOS BASIN 1305 FIG. 14. Schematic evolution of calcite crusts and their relationship with stevensite, showing the impact of diagenetic process and products on porosity preservation, enhancement, and destruction and their resulting impact on permeability. 1306 R. HERLINGER, JR. ET AL. JSR FIG. 15. Schematic diagenetic evolution of intraclastic grainstone and rudstones, showing the impact of diagenetic process and products on porosity preservation, enhancement, and destruction and their resulting impact on permeability. JSR LACUSTRINE PRE-SALT CARBONATE RESERVOIRS FROM NORTHERN CAMPOS BASIN analyses are necessary for a better understanding of origin and timing of these minerals. Porosity and Permeability of Reservoir Petrofacies Reservoir petrofacies were defined for the studied lithologies, based on the main primary structures, textures, and constituents, major diagenetic processes and products, and patterns of relationship between these parameters with porosity and permeability. Bivalve Gastropod Rudstones with Interparticle Porosity. Preservation of interparticle porosity occurred mostly where neomorphism predominated over dissolution Figs. 3D, 4D . This petrofacies has the best permeability among the bioclastic reservoirs, even considering samples with lower porosity Fig. 16A, Table 1 . Partially preserved primary porosity, mildly reduced by mechanical compaction and minor cementation, is connected by large pore throats. MICP analyses indicate that the pore throats are significantly larger than in other petrofacies Fig. 17A . In some cases, however, continued cementation has narrowed the pore throats, decreasing permeability. Subordinate moldic pores increased the porosity, but with little effect on permeability. Nevertheless, the local development of vugular pores has enlarged the primary pores, enhancing permeability. Bivalve Gastropod Rudstones with Moldic Porosity. Bioclastic rocks with predominantly moldic or intraparticle porosity, combined with some interparticle porosity, are common. These rocks have good porosity but low permeability Table 1, Fig. 16A . The cementation of the moldic and intraparticle pores is common, occasionally totally occluding the secondary porosity. The remaining interparticle pores contribute to the permeability, but because pore throats are controlled by microcrystalline and intercrystalline pores Fig. 17A , permeabilities are generally low. Locally, vugular porosity was formed by enlargement and connection of molds, increasing pore throats and generating fair permeability conditions. Bivalve Gastropod Rudstones with Vugular Porosity. Vugular porosity is often scarce in the studied rocks Fig. 4E . Where vugs are the predominant pore type, porosities and permeabilities are generally low Table 1, Fig. 16A , due to the low connectivity of the pore system. The presence of remnants of interparticle porosity contributes to some permeability, though generally low. However, because core samples with high vugular porosity were poorly recovered, and not suitable for petrophysical analyses, it is possible that the amount of vugular porosity was underestimated in the reservoirs due to these sampling limitations. Bivalve Gastropod Grainstones with Moldic Porosity. These grainstones have a high content of moldic porosity, and a total porosity higher than all the bioclastic petrofacies Table 1, Fig. 16A . These rocks generally present remaining interparticle porosity, which gives them some permeability. Vugular porosity was generated from enlargement of moldic porosity, producing widened pore throats, which increases permeability. The grainstones often present recrystallization, which has generated intercrystalline porosity, but with narrow pore throats Fig. 17B and low permeability. Stevensitic Arenites. The high instability of Mg-clays cf. Tosca and Wright 2014 has favored the dissolution of ooids and the precipitation of silica and dolomite Fig. 5 , redistributing the original porosity. The pore system of stevensitic arenites is extremely heterogeneous, generally presenting high porosities and highly variable permeabilities Table 1, Fig. 16E . The dissolution of ooids, resulting in moldic and intraparticle porosity, was important, generating a significant increase in porosity. Microporosity in authigenic silica is observed. Remnants of primary 1307 interparticle porosity are occasionally preserved, although the original interstitial porosity of most of the samples was completely filled by dolomite and quartz. Dolomitization has generated abundant intercrystalline porosity, occasionally connecting moldic and intracrystalline pores, and supplying permeability to the stevensitic arenites. Coalescent Calcite Crusts. Coalescent calcite crusts are composed of well-developed shrubs of fascicular calcite aggregates, which coalesced vertically and or horizontally Fig. 8A . The growth of these precipitates generated a growth-framework primary pore system with moderate porosity and good permeability, controlled by large pore throats Table 1, Fig. 16B . Rezende and Pope 2015 properly related aspects of the depositional texture, including shrub size, sorting, and packing, to the porosity and permeability of analogous calcite crust reservoirs from the Santos Basin. According to those authors, the size of individual shrubs exerts a primary control on pore size, affecting both porosity and permeability. Although depositional texture probably exerted a major control on the primary petrophysical properties of the crusts, their primary fabric was strongly modified during diagenesis by cementation and or dissolution. The dissolution of stevensite laminae or peloids filling interstices among the fascicular aggregates or in adjacent layers favored the precipitation of dolomite partially or totally cementing the interstitial porosity, which represented the main reducer of primary porosity. Commonly, coalescent crusts present porosity enhancement through partial dissolution of shrubs and cements Fig. 8A , which has increased their porosity and has led to an enlargement of pore throats, with a consequent increase of permeability Fig. 17D . Intracrystalline porosity related to dissolution of dolomite crystals Fig. 9B, C or shrubs is very common. Porosity is present even in rocks without petrographic porosity, due to intracrystalline porosity generated from dissolution of shrubs, as observed in SEM analyses Fig. 9E . Non-Coalescent Calcite Crusts. Poorly developed calcite crusts with non-coalescent shrubs of fascicular calcite display interstices occupied by stevensite laminae and peloids, or even by siliciclastic matrix, resulting in limited growth-framework primary porosity Fig. 14 . Consequently, these rocks show low primary porosity and permeability. Commonly, associated stevensite laminae and peloids were partially replaced mainly by calcite spherulites and dolomite crystals. Later dissolution has generated intercrystalline porosity Fig. 7E . The dominance of discontinuous intercrystalline porosity plus minor growth-framework porosity has generated poor reservoirs with mostly narrow pore throats Figs. 16B, 17E . Most non-coalescent crusts have low porosity and permeability. Even though these reservoirs present poor quality Table 2 , they can store oil and probably contribute to the production of the wells. Intraclastic Grainstones and Rudstones. Few intraclastic rocks exhibit good reservoir quality, owing to partially preserved primary porosity, representing good quality reservoirs Table 2, Fig. 16D . At least part of the intraclastic grainstones and rudstones composed of reworked calcite crusts and spherulites had good primary interparticle porosity, which was destroyed by compaction and cementation Fig. 10C . Heterogeneous cementation preserved part of the primary porosity, which was enhanced by particle dissolution, while the porosity of uncemented rocks was completely obliterated during mesodiagenesis by interparticle pressure dissolution and calcite cementation Fig. 15 . No clear particle size control is observed on porosity and permeability, suggesting that diagenesis is the major control. Secondary intraparticle porosity in partly dissolved intraclasts is occasionally seen in rocks with some preserved interparticle porosity Fig. 10D . When moldic or vugular porosity occur associated with interparticle porosity, permeability is higher, generating the best reservoir conditions among the intraclastic rocks. 1308 R. HERLINGER, JR. ET AL. JSR JSR LACUSTRINE PRE-SALT CARBONATE RESERVOIRS FROM NORTHERN CAMPOS BASIN 1309 FIG. 16. Correlation between porosity and permeability, showing the interpreted effect of diagenesis on pore type and permeability in studied reservoir petrofacies A pore type of bioclastic bivalve gastropod rudstones and grainstones ranges between totally moldic to interparticle. The interpretive axis Interparticle Porosity represents 100 of interparticle pores, which may be preserved or reduced by compaction and cementation. The other extreme axis would represent 100 moldic porosity, which increases by dissolution of bioclasts or decreases by cementation of molds. In addition, intercrystalline porosity often generated by dolomitization increases both total porosity and permeability. Samples show the association of more than one type of pore, ranging between the interpreted axes. B Coalescent calcite crusts have primary growthframework porosity that can be reduced by cementation, or preserved and increased by pore enlargement. Alternatively, the interstices may have been early filled by stevensite, which may have been preserved or dissolved. Porosity of non-coalescent crusts is related to the dissolution of stevensite, generating intercrystalline porosity among dolomite crystals and spherulites. Abundant intracrystalline dissolution is observed within calcite crusts and dolomite cements, which generates some porosity with minor effect on permeability. C Dolostones have a well-defined trend of porosity and permeability controlled by the amount of intercrystalline porosity. D Intraclastic rudstones and grainstones are intensely affected by compaction and cementation. Partial preservation of interparticle porosity promotes preservation of permeability both porosity and permeability may be increased by particle dissolution. E Stevensitic arenites pore types range between moldic microcrystalline porosity related to silicification low permeability , and moldic intercrystalline porosity related to dolomitization high permeability . Clay-Rich Packstones. Intraclastic rocks with clay matrix are usually not reservoirs. In some cases, however, early dissolution of matrix occurred, leaving residual dolomite and or silica. Some of such petrofacies evolved similarly to grainstones, with secondary porosity partially preserved by heterogeneous cementation Fig. 15 . Another possibility for the occurrence of secondary porosity in clay-rich packstones is through early heterogeneous dolomitization or silicification, followed by dissolution. Dolostones. Dolomitization is a very important process, generating rocks with the best porosity and permeability of the studied reservoirs Table 1, Fig. 16C . In many cases, sucrosic dolomitization has added intercrystalline porosity, leaving relicts of primary interparticle or moldic and or vugular secondary porosity. Dolomitized rudstones with moldic and or vugular porosity have developed higher porosities and permeabilities after dolomitization through the connection of vugs and molds by intercrystalline porosity, which have controlled pore throat diameters Fig. 17C . However, the vugular porosity can be directly related to dolomitization processes. Late processes were limited to the precipitation of minor amounts of saddle dolomite, preserving most of the intercrystalline porosity generated during dolomitization. The frequent total dolomitization of sag rocks generated significant decrease of pore throat size Fig. 17F . Apparently, early dolomitization caused severe porosity reduction, while dolomitization associated with fracturing has generated higher porosities and permeabilities. 1999 Claes et al. 2017 . Travertines, however, exhibit steep facies diversity and distribution restricted to the immediate proximity of their source springs. These features are not observed in the pre-salt calcite crusts, indicating that these carbonates were precipitated in subaqueous environments. Continuous subsidence during the sag stage with a constant supply of magnesium, calcium, and silica allowed the accumulation of more than 200 meters of precipitated carbonates and clays, which allowed the development of reservoirs with impressive thicknesses. The geometry of the fascicular calcite crusts inhibited the compaction of the reservoirs, preserving good permeability associated with large pores and wide pore throats. The dissolution of stevensite after the precipitation of spherulites and dolomite developed significant secondary porosity in originally argillaceous deposits Tosca and Wright 2015 . The distribution of calcite, stevensite, and porosity in the sag section follows complex patterns, which were fundamentally controlled not by lacustrine base level but by the chemistry of the lake waters Wright and Barnett 2015 . These observations have significant implications for the construction of predictive and conceptual models for the exploration of the sag pre-salt reservoirs in the Campos and Santos basins, and for planning the development and optimizing oil recovery from the producing oilfields. CONCLUSIONS 1. Implications for Exploration of Lacustrine Carbonates The absence of features characteristic of vadose diagenesis i.e., pendular or meniscus cements, geopetal features, etc. and of exposure surfaces in massive bioclastic reservoirs about 100 meters thick, suggests that they were accumulated in relatively deep lacustrine environments. The extensive resedimentation of the bioclastic deposits by gravitational mass movements was probably triggered by tectonism, as also observed in the central area of the basin Goldberg et al. 2017 . These factors allowed the accumulation of thick bioclastic deposits, which were probably remobilized from shoreface and related shallow-water environments. The limited fragmentation and abrasion of bivalve shells suggests little reworking and short residence time in moderate energy shallow environments before redeposition. The good preservation of the bioclasts contributes to the common occurrence of reservoirs with good permeability owing to large pores connected by wide pore throats. Redeposition to deep lacustrine settings allowed impressive accumulation of the bioclastic deposits and inhibited extensive dissolution of the bioclasts and interparticle cementation. Thus, bioclastic deposits redeposited in relatively deep lacustrine settings may constitute attractive exploratory targets in other areas of the Campos Basin, and in other rift basins with similar geologic context. The crusts of fascicular-optic calcite present significant similarity with crystalline shrub facies and pore types of travertines Chafetz and Guidry 2. 3. 4. A study integrating systematic petrographic characterization and petrophysical analysis reveals that the pre-salt lacustrine reservoirs of northern Campos Basin have complex pore systems, which result in highly heterogeneous permeability patterns. The primary composition and porosity have a strong influence on the evolution quality of the reservoirs. The compositional and porosity evolution of the bioclastic rudstone and grainstone rift reservoirs is controlled by the balance between dissolution and neomorphism of the aragonitic bivalves and gastropods. When the circulation and geochemistry of eogenetic interstitial fluids favored the dissolution of aragonite and precipitation of low magnesium calcite, moldic porosity was generated and primary interparticle porosity was reduced, resulting in low permeability. The predominance of neomorphism over dissolution resulted in higher permeability due to the preservation of primary interparticle porosity. The redeposition of the bioclasts into relatively deep lacustrine settings is a crucial factor for the accumulation of thick deposits with partially preserved interparticle porosity, which constitute good quality reservoirs. Sag stage stevensitic deposits were replaced mainly by calcite spherulites and dolomite. These rocks locally constitute reservoirs, where secondary porosity was generated by stevensite dissolution. Dissolution of stevensite provided magnesium and silica, favoring the dolomitization and silicification commonly observed in the studied succession. 1310 R. HERLINGER, JR. ET AL. JSR FIG. 17. Distribution of pore throats of studied samples and their interpreted relationship with the pore type each color represents one sample A bioclastic rudstones. B Bioclastic grainstones. C Dolostones from the rift section. D Coalescent calcite crust. E Non-coalescent calcite crust. F Dolostones from the sag section. 5. Abiotic, fascicular-optic calcite crusts with growth-framework primary porosity, or interstitial porosity generated by the dissolution of stevensite, constitute the main sag phase reservoirs. The patterns of preservation, dissolution, and replacement of stevensite exerted an important control on the quality of these reservoirs. Petrographic evidence indicates that most of the mineralogical and porosity evolution of these rocks occurred during eodiagenesis, mainly in response to the high reactivity of the stevensite. 6. Syngenetic sag precipitates were controlled by the geochemistry of lacustrine waters through changes on pH, Mg and Ca activities, temperature, and pCO2, promoting the alternation of periods of calcite or stevensite precipitation. The syngenetic precipitation of fascicular calcite crusts took place mostly covering stevensitic deposits, although in some cases they clearly replaced stevensite, suggesting that at least part of the fascicular calcite is diagenetic. JSR LACUSTRINE PRE-SALT CARBONATE RESERVOIRS FROM NORTHERN CAMPOS BASIN 1311 TABLE 2. Statistical summary of MICP analysis showing pore throat radius and pore classification of petrofacies. Petrofacies Median Pore Throat lm Average Pore Throat lm Microporosity Mesoporosity Macroporosity n Bioclastic Rudstones Bioclastic Grainstones Stevensitic Arenites Coalescent Calcite Crust Non-Coalescent Calcite Crust Dolostones Average 3.77 2.33 2.87 4.31 0.64 4.27 3.03 4.90 3.25 6.02 7.77 1.96 5.59 4.92 47.12 20.85 29.05 37.50 50.94 13.67 33.19 28.66 60.65 28.50 31.00 40.49 45.17 39.08 24.22 18.50 42.45 31.50 8.57 41.16 27.73 5 3 2 8 10 20 48 7. 8. 9. Intraclastic rocks composed of intraclasts of calcite crusts and spherulites containing minor amounts of stevensite ooids and peloids or matrix may constitute good reservoirs when the interparticle porosity is preserved and or the clays are dissolved. Stevensitic arenites were strongly affected by meteoric dissolution and replacement by dolomite and silica, related to regional uplift and erosion after the rift phase. The resulting rocks, composed almost exclusively by silica and or dolomite, have a complex porous system, with moldic, microcrystalline, and intergranular porosity, and highly heterogeneous permeability patterns. Dolomitization is an important process of porosity modification of both rift and sag deposits, showing a great diversity of origins and fabrics. Early dolomitization, related mainly to stevensite dissolution and replacement, has usually not enhanced reservoir quality. However, dolomitization related to late fracturing and silicification has locally developed reservoirs with high porosity and permeability. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors would like to thank to PETROBRAS S.A. for access to samples, well logs, and petrophysical analysis, and for permission to publish this work. We gratefully acknowledge reviewers Sadoon Morad and Noel P. James, Associate Editor Stacy Lynn Reeder, and Editor Leslie Melim for helping to improve this paper. REFERENCES ABRAHA O, D., AND WARME, J., 1990, Lacustrine and associated deposits in a rifted continental margin Lower Cretaceous Lagoa Feia Formation, Campos Basin, Offshore Brazil, in Katz, B.J., ed., Lacustrine Basin Exploration Case Studies and Modern Analogs American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir 50, p. 287 305. AHR, W.M., 2008, Geology of Carbonate Reservoirs The Identification, Description, and Characterization of Hydrocarbon Reservoirs in Carbonate Rocks Hoboken, John Wiley Sons, 296 p. ALTENHOFEN, S.D., 2013, Caracterizac a o petrogra fica de depo sitos carbona ticos lacustres do Grupo Lagoa Feia, Bacia de Campos, Brasil Bsc Thesis Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, 69 p. ALVARENGA, R.S., IACOPINI, D., KUCHLE, J., SCHERER, C., AND GOLDBERG, K., 2016, Seismic characteristics and distribution of hydrothermal vent complexes in the Cretaceous offshore rift section of the Campos Basin, offshore Brazil Marine and Petroleum Geology, v. 74, p. 12 25. ARMELENTI, G., GOLDBERG, K., KUCHLE, J., AND DE ROS, L.F., 2016, Deposition, diagenesis and reservoir potential of non-carbonate sedimentary rocks from the Rift Section of Campos Basin, Brazil Petroleum Geoscience, v. 22, p. 223 239. ASLANIAN, D., MOULIN, M., OLIVET, J., UNTERNEHR, P., MATIAS, L., BACHE, F., RABINEAU, M., NOUZE , H., KLINGELHEOFER, F., CONTRUCCI, I., AND LABAILS, C., 2009, Brazilian and African passive margins of the Central Segment of the South Atlantic Ocean Kinematic constraints Tectonophysics, v. 468, p. 98 112. AUSTIN, J.A., AND UCHUPI, E., 1982, Continental oceanic crustal transition off southwest Africa American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Bulletin, v. 66, p. 1328 1347. BASAN, P.B., LOWDEN, B.D., WHATTLER, P.R., AND ATTARD, J.J., 1997, Pore-size data in petrophysics a perspective on the measurement of pore geometry, in Lovell, M.A., and Harvey, P.K., eds., Developments in Petrophysics Geological Society of London, Special Publication 122, p. 47 67. BEAVINGTON-PENNEY, S.J., NADIN, P., WRIGHT, V.P., CLARKE, E., MCQUILKEN, J., AND BAILEY, H.W., 2008, Reservoir quality variation on an Eocene carbonate ramp, El Garia Formation, offshore Tunisia structural control of burial corrosion and dolomitisation Sedimentary Geology, v. 209, p. 42 57. BECK, R., AND ANDREASSEN, J., 2010, Spherulitic growth of calcium carbonate Crystal Growth Design, v. 10, p. 2934 2947. BERTANI, R., AND CAROZZI, A., 1985a, Lagoa Feia Formation Lower Cretaceous , Campos Basin, Offshore Brazil rift valley stage lacustrine carbonate reservoirs, I Journal of Petroleum Geology, v. 8, p. 37 58. BERTANI, R., AND CAROZZI, A., 1985b, Lagoa Feia Formation Lower Cretaceous Campos Basin, Offshore Brazil rift valley type lacustrine carbonate reservoirs, II Journal of Petroleum Geology, v. 8, p. 199 220. BRAISSANT, O., CAILLEAU, G., DUPRAZ, C., AND VERRECCHIA, E.P., 2003, Bacterially induced mineralization of calcium carbonate in terrestrial environments the role of exopolysaccharides and amino acids Journal of Sedimentary Research, v. 73, p. 485 490. BRIGAUD, B., VINCENT, B., DURLET, C., DECONINCK, J., JOBARD, E., PICKARD, N., YVEN, B., AND LANDREIN, P., 2014, Characterization and origin of permeability porosity heterogeneity in shallow-marine carbonates from core scale to 3D reservoir dimension Middle Jurassic, Paris Basin, France Marine and Petroleum Geology, v. 57, p. 631 651. BURNE, R.V., AND MOORE, L.S., 1987, Microbialites organosedimentary deposits of benthic microbial communities Palaios, v. 2, p. 255 262. CAINELLI, C., AND MOHRIAK, W.U., 1999, Some remarks on the evolution of sedimentary basins along the Eastern Brazilian continental margin Episodes, v. 22, p. 206 216. CALVO, J.P., BLANC-VALLERON, M.M., RODRI GUEZ-ARANDI A, J.P., ROUCHY, J.M., AND SANZ, M.E., 1999, Authigenic clay minerals in continental evaporitic environments, in Thiry, M., and Simon-Coinc on, R., eds., Palaeoweathering, Palaeosurfaces and Related Continental Deposits International Association of Sedimentologists, Special Publication 27, p. 129 151. CARMINATTI, M., DIAS, J.L., AND WOLFF, B., 2009, From turbidites to carbonates breaking paradigms in deep waters Houston, Texas, Offshore Technology Conference, 4 7 May, OTC 20124. CARON, V., AND NELSON, C.S., 2009, Diversity of neomorphic fabrics in New Zealand PlioPleistocene cool-water limestones insights into aragonite alteration pathways and controls Journal of Sedimentary Research, v. 79, p. 226 246. CARVALHO, M.D., PRAC A, U.M., SILVA-TELLES, A.C., JAHNERT, R.J., AND DIAS, L.D., 2000, Bioclastic carbonate lacustrine facies models in the Campos Basin Lower Cretaceous , Brazil, in Gierlowski-Kordesch, E., and Kelts, K.R., eds., Lake Basins through Space and Time American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Studies in Geology 46, p. 245 255. CASANOVA, J., 1986, East African Rift stromatolites, in Frostick, L., ed., Sedimentation in the African Rift Geological Society of London, Special Publication 25, p. 201 210. CASTRO, J.C., AZAMBUJA FILHO, N.C., AND XAVIER, A.A.P.G., 1981, Fa cies e ana lise estratigra fica da Formac a o Lagoa Feia, Creta ceo Inferior da Bacia de Campos, in VIII Congreso Geolo gico Argentino, Proceedings, p. 567 576. CHAFETZ, H.S., 2013, Porosity in bacterially induced carbonates focus on micropores American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Bulletin, v. 97, p. 2103 2111. CHAFETZ, H.S., AND GUIDRY, S.A., 1999, Bacterial shrubs, crystal shrubs, and ray-crystal shrubs bacterial vs. abiotic precipitation Sedimentary Geology, v. 126, p. 57 74. CHANG, H.K., KOWSMANN, R.O., AND FIGUEIREDO, A.M.F., 1988, New concepts on the development of east Brazilian marginal basins Episodes, v. 2, p. 194 202. CHANG, H.K., KOWSMANN, R.O., FIGUEIREDO, A.M.F., AND BENDER, A., 1992, Tectonics and stratigraphy of the East Brazil Rift system an overview Tectonophysics, v. 213, p. 97 138. CHOQUETTE, P.W., AND PRAY, L.C., 1970, Geologic nomenclature and classification of porosity in sedimentary carbonates American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Bulletin, v. 54, p. 207 250. CLAES, H., ERTHAL, M.M., SOETE, J., O ZKUL, M., AND SWENNEN, R., 2017, Shrub and pore type classification petrography of travertine shrubs from the Ballik Belevi area Denizli, SW Turkey Quaternary International, v. 437, p. 147 163. CLEMSON, J., CARTWRIGHT, J., AND BOOTH, J., 1997, Structural segmentation and the influence of basement structure on the Namibian passive margin Geological of London Society, Journal, v. 154, p. 477 482. DAVIS, R.L., AND WILKINSON, B.H., 1983, Sedimentology and petrology of freshwater lacustrine carbonate mid-Tertiary Camp Davis Formation, northwestern Wyoming University of Wyoming, Contributions to Geology, v. 22, p. 45 55. 1312 R. HERLINGER, JR. ET AL. DE WET, C.B., MORA, C.I., GORE, P.J.W., GIERLOWSKI-KORDESCH, E.H., AND CUCOLO, S.J., 2002, Deposition and geochemistry of lacustrine and spring carbonates in Mesozoic rift basins, eastern North America, in Renaut, R., and Ashley, G., eds., Sedimentation in Continental Rifts Society for Sedimentary Geology, Special Publication 73, p. 309 325. DIAS, J.L., 2005, Tecto nica, estratigrafia e sedimentac a o no Andar Aptiano da margem leste brasileira Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, v. 13, p. 7 25. DIAS, J.L., OLIVEIRA, J., AND VIEIRA, J., 1988, Sedimentological and stratigraphic analysis of the Lagoa Feia Formation, rift phase of Campos basin, offshore Brazil Revista Brasileira de Geocie ncias, v. 18, p. 252 260. DICKSON, J.A.D., 1965, A modified staining technique for carbonates in thin section Nature, v. 205, p. 587. DILL, H.G., 2001, The geology of aluminum phosphate and sulphates of the alunite group minerals a review Earth-Science Reviews, v. 53, p. 35 93. DUBLYANSKY, Y.V., 1995, Speleogenetic history of the Hungarian hydrothermal karst Environmental Geology, v. 25, p. 24 35. DUNAGAN, S.P., AND TURNER, C.E., 2004, Regional paleohydrologic and paleoclimatic settings of wetland lacustrine depositional systems in the Morrison Formation Upper Jurassic , Western Interior, USA Sedimentary Geology, v. 167, p. 269 296. DU RRAST, H., AND SIEGESMUND, S., 1999, Correlation between rock fabrics and physical properties of carbonate reservoir rocks International Journal of Earth Sciences, v. 88, p. 392 408. EHRENBERG, S.N., EBERLI, G.P., KERAMATI, M., AND MOALLEMI, S.A., 2006, Porosity permeability relationships in interlayered limestone dolostone reservoirs American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Bulletin, v. 90, p. 91 114. EHRENBERG, S.N., WALDERHAUG, O., AND BJ RLYKKE, K., 2012, Carbonate porosity creation by mesogenetic dissolution reality or illusion American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Bulletin, v. 96, p. 217 233. EICHENSEER, H.T.H., WALGENWITZ, F.R., AND BIONDI, P.J., 1999, Stratigraphic control on facies and diagenesis of dolomitized oolitic siliciclastic ramp sequences Pinda Group, Albian, Offshore Angola American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Bulletin, v. 83, p. 1729 1758. FEDORCHUK, N.D., 2014, Evaluating the biogenicity of fluvial lacustrine stromatolites from the Mesoproterozoic Copper Harbor Conglomerate, Upper Peninsula of Michigan MSc Thesis University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, 59 p. FOUKE, B.W., 2011, Hot-spring systems geobiology abiotic and biotic influences on travertine formation at Mammoth Hot Springs, Yellowstone National Park, USA Sedimentology, v. 58, p. 170 219. FROGLEY, M.R., GRIFFITHS, H.I., AND MARTENS, K., 2002, Modern and fossil ostracods from ancient lakes, in Holmes, J.A., and Chivas, A.R., eds., The Ostracoda Applications in Quaternary Research American Geophysical Union, Geophysical Monograph Series 131, p. 167 184. FURQUIM, S.A.C., GRAHAM, R.C., BARBIERO, L., DE QUEIROZ NETO, J.P., AND VALLE S, V., 2008, Mineralogy and genesis of smectites in an alkaline saline environment of Pantanal wetland, Brazil Clays and Clay Minerals, v. 56, p. 579 595. GARCI A-RUIZ, J.M., 2000, Geochemical scenarios for the precipitation of biomimetic inorganic carbonates, in Grotzinger, J.P., and James, N.P., eds., Carbonate Sedimentation and Diagenesis in the Evolving Precambrian World Society for Sedimentary Geology, Special Publication 67, p. 75 89. GIERLOWSKI-KORDESCH, E.H., 2009, Lacustrine Carbonates, in Alonso-Zarza, A.M., and Tanner, L.H., eds., Carbonates in Continental Settings Amsterdam, Elsevier, Developments in Sedimentology 61, p. 1 101. GOLDBERG, K., KUCHLE, J., SCHERER, C., ALVARENGA, R., ENE, P.L., ARMELENTI, G., AND DE ROS, L.F., 2017, Re-sedimented deposits in the rift section of the Campos Basin Marine and Petroleum Geology, v. 80, p. 412 431. GROTZINGER, J.P., AND KNOLL, A.H., 1995, Anomalous carbonate precipitates Is the Precambrian the key to the Permian Palaios, v. 10, p. 578 96. GROTZINGER, J.P., AND KNOLL, A.H., 1999, Stromatolites in Precambrian carbonates evolutionary mileposts or environmental dipsticks Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, v. 27, p. 313 358. GUARDADO, L.R., SPADINI, A.R., BRANDA O, J.S.L., AND MELO, M.R., 2000, Petroleum system of the Campos Basin, in Mello, M.R., and Katz, B., eds., Petroleum System of South Atlantic Margins American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir 73, p. 317 324. HARRIS, N., SORRIAUX, P., AND TOOMEY, D.F., 1994, Geology of the Lower Cretaceous Viodo carbonate, Congo basin a lacustrine carbonate in the South Atlantic rift, in Lomando, A.J., Schreiber, B., and Harris, P.M., eds., Lacustrine Reservoirs and Depositional Systems Society for Sedimentary Geology, Core Workshop 19, p. 143 172. HASSALL, J., FERRARIS, P., AL-RAISI, M., HURLEY, N.F., BOYD, A., AND ALLEN, D.F., 2004, Comparison of permeability predictors from NMR, formation image and other logs in a carbonate reservoir Abu Dhabi, Society of Petroleum Engineers, International Conference and Exhibition, p. 1 12. HESSE, R., 1989, Silica diagenesis origin of inorganic and replacement cherts EarthScience Reviews, v. 26, p. 253 284. HEWARD, A.P., CHUENBUNCHOM, S., MAKEL, G., MARSLAND, D., AND SPRING, L., 2000, Nang Nuan oil field, B6 27, Gulf of Thailand karst reservoirs of meteoric or deep-burial origin Petroleum Geoscience, v. 6, p. 15 27. JAMES, N., AND CHOQUETTE, P.W., 1984, Diagenesis 9, Limestones The Meteoric Diagenetic Environmental Geoscience Canada, v. 11, p. 161 194. JSR JONES, B.F., 1986, Clay mineral diagenesis in lacustrine sediments, in Mumpton, F.A., ed., Studies in Diagenesis, v. 1578 U.S. Geological Survey, Bulletin, p. 291 300. JONES, B., AND RENAUT, R.W., 1994, Crystal fabrics and microbiota in large pisoliths from Laguna Pastos Grandes, Bolivia Sedimentology, v. 41, p. 1171 1202. KARNER, G., AND DRISCOLL, N., 1999, Tectonic and stratigraphic development of the West African and eastern Brazilian margins insights from quantitative basin modelling, in Cameron, N., Bate, R., and Clure, V., eds., The Oil and Gas Habitats of the South Atlantic Geological Society of London, Special Publication 153, p. 11 40. KARNER, G.D., AND GAMBO A, L.A.P., 2007, Timing and origin of the South Atlantic pre-salt sag basins and their capping evaporites, in Schreiber, B.C., Lugli, S., and Babel, M., eds., Tectonics, Basin Evolution and Evaporites Geological Society of London, Special Publication 285, p. 15 35. KENDALL, A., 1977, Fascicular-optic calcite a replacement of bundled acicular carbonate cements Journal of Sedimentary Petrology, v. 47, p. 1056 1062. KHALAF, F.I., 1988, Petrography and diagenesis of silcrete from Kuwait, Arabian Gulf Journal of Sedimentary Petrology, v. 58, p. 1014 1022. L N Y, A., 2006, Making sense of carbonate pore systems American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Bulletin, v. 90, p. 1381 1405. LUCIA, F.J., 1995, Rock-fabric petrophysical classification of carbonate pore space for reservoir characterization American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Bulletin, v. 79, p. 1275 1300. MACHEL, H.G., 2005, Investigations of burial diagenesis in carbonate hydrocarbon reservoir rocks Geoscience Canada, v. 32, p. 103 128. MACHEL, H.G., AND LONNEE, J., 2002, Hydrothermal dolomite a product of poor definition and imagination Sedimentary Geology, v. 152, p. 163 171. MAZZULLO, S.J., 2004, Overview of porosity evolution in carbonate reservoirs Kansas Geological Society, Bulletin 79, 19 p. MAZZULLO, S.J., AND HARRIS, P.M., 1991, An overview of dissolution porosity development in the deep-burial environment, with examples from carbonate reservoirs in the Permian Basin, in Candelaria, M., ed., Permian Basin Plays Tomorrow s Technology Today West Texas Geological Society, p. 125 138. MCKENZIE, D., 1978, Some remarks on the development of sedimentary basins Earth and Planetary Science Letters, v. 40, p. 25 32. MCKENZIE, J., AND VASCONCELOS, C., 2009, Dolomite Mountains and the origin of the dolomite rock of which they mainly consist historical developments and new perspectives Sedimentology, v. 56, p. 205 219. MEISLING, K.E., COBBOLD, P.R., AND MOUNT, V.S., 2001, Segmentation of an obliquely rifted margin, Campos and Santos basins, southeastern Brazil American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Bulletin, v. 85, p. 1925 1944. MEISTER, P., JOHNSON, O., CORSETTI, F., AND NEALSON, K.H., 2011, Magnesium inhibition controls spherical carbonate precipitation in ultrabasic springwater Cedars, California and culture experiments, in Reitner, J., Que ric, N.V., and Arp, G., eds., Advances in Stromatolite Geobiology Berlin, Springer, Lecture Notes in Earth Sciences 131, p. 101 121. MIZUSAKI, A.M.P., THOMAZ FILHO, A., AND VALENC A, J., 1988, Volcano-sedimentary sequence of Neocomian age in Campos Basin Brazil Revista Brasileira de Geocie ncias, v. 18, p. 247 251. MOHRIAK, W., NEMCOK, M., AND ENCISO, G., 2008, South Atlantic divergent margin evolution rift-border uplift and salt tectonics in the basins of SE Brazil, in Pankhurst, R.J., Trouw, R.A.J., Brito Neves, B.B., and De Wit, M.J., eds., West Gondwana PreCenozoic Correlations Across the South Atlantic Region Geological Society of London, Special Publication 294, p. 365 398. MOORE, C.H., 2001, Carbonate Reservoirs Porosity Evolution and Diagenesis in a Sequence Stratigraphic Framework Amsterdam, Elsevier, Developments in Sedimentology 67, 444 p. MOORE, C.H., AND WADE, W.J., 2013, Carbonate Reservoirs Porosity and Diagenesis in a Sequence Stratigraphic Framework Amsterdam, Elsevier, Developments in Sedimentology 55, 392 p. MORSE, J.W., AND MACKENZIE, F., 1990, Geochemistry of Sedimentary Carbonates Amsterdam, Elsevier, 706 p. MOUNTJOY, E.W., AND MARQUEZ, X.M., 1997, Predicting reservoir properties in dolomites Upper Devonian Leduc Buildups, Deep Alberta Basin, in Kupecz, J., Gluyas, J., and Block, S., eds., Reservoir Quality Prediction in Sandstones and Carbonates American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir 69, p. 267 306. MOURA, J., AND PRAC A, U., 1985, Ostracodes das sequ e ncias na o marinhas e transicionais Mesozo icas Andares Jiquia e Alagoas , Bacia de Campos, in Coleta nea de Trabalhos Paleontolo gicos Departamento Nacional da Produc a o Mineral, Ministe rio das Minas e Energia, Bras lia, Se rie Geologia 27, p. 401 408. MUNIZ, M.C., 2014, Tectono-stratigraphic evolution of the Barremian Aptian Continental Continental Rift Carbonates in Southern Campos Basin, Brazil PhD Thesis Royal Holloway University of London, 324 p. MUNIZ, M.C., AND BOSENCE, D.W.J., 2015, Pre-salt microbialites from the Campos Basin offshore Brazil image log facies, facies model and cyclicity in lacustrine carbonates, in Bosence, D.W.J., Gibbons, K.A., Le Heron, D.P., Morgan, W.A., Pritchard, T., and Vining, B.A., eds., Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production Geological Society of London, Special Publication 418, p. 221 242. MURRAY, R.C., 1990, Diagenetic silica stratification in a paleosilcrete, North Texas Journal of Sedimentary Petrology, v. 60, p. 717 720. JSR LACUSTRINE PRE-SALT CARBONATE RESERVOIRS FROM NORTHERN CAMPOS BASIN NU RNBERG, D., AND MU LLER, R.D., 1991, The tectonic evolution of the South Atlantic from Late Jurassic to present Tectonophysics, v. 191, p. 27 53. ODIN, G.S., 1988, Green Marine Clays Amsterdam, Elsevier, Developments in Sedimentology 45, 444 p. PLATT, N.H., AND WRIGHT, V.P., 1991, Lacustrine carbonates facies models, facies distributions and hydrocarbon aspects, in Anado n, P., Cabrera, L., and Kelts, K., eds., Lacustrine Facies Analysis International Association of Sedimentologists, p. 57 74. POPE, M.C., GROTZINGER, J.P., AND SCHREIBER, B.C., 2000, Evaporitic subtidal stromatolites produced by in situ precipitation textures, facies associations, and temporal significance Journal of Sedimentary Research, v. 70, p. 1139 1151. POZO, M., AND CASAS, J., 1999, Origin of kerolite and associated Mg clays in palustrine lacustrine environments. The Esquivias deposit Neogene Madrid Basin, Spain Clay Minerals, v. 34, p. 395 418. RABINOWITZ, P.D., AND LABRECQUE, J., 1979, The Mesozoic South Atlantic Ocean and evolution of its continental margins Journal of Geophysical Research, v. 84, p. 5973 6002. RACEY, A., BAILEY, H.W., BECKETT, D., GALLAGHER, L.T., HAMPTON, M.J., AND MCQUILKEN, J., 2001, The petroleum geology of the Early Eocene El Garia Formation, Hasdrubal Field, Offshore Tunisia Journal of Petroleum Geology, v. 24, p. 29 53. REHIM, H., MIZUSAKI, A.M.P., CARVALHO, M.D., AND MONTEIRO, M., 1986, Talco e estevensita na Formac a o Lagoa Feia da Bacia de Campos poss veis implicac o es no ambiente deposicional XXXIV Congresso Brasileiro de Geologia p. 416 424. RENAUT, R.W., TIERCELIN, J.J., AND OWEN, R.B., 1986, Mineral precipitation and diagenesis in the sediments of the Lake Bogoria basin, Kenya Rift Valley, in Frostick, L., ed., Sedimentation in the African Rift Geological Society of London, Special Publication 25, p. 159 175. REZENDE, M.F., AND POPE, M.C., 2015, Importance of depositional texture in pore characterization of subsalt microbialite carbonates, offshore Brazil, in Bosence, D.W.J., Gibbons, K.A., Le Heron, D.P., Morgan, W.A., Pritchard, T., and Vining, B.A., eds., Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production Geological Society of London, Special Publication 418, p. 193 207. RIDING, R., 2000, Microbial carbonates the geological record of calcified bacterial algal mats and biofilms Sedimentology, v. 47, p. 179 214. RIDING, R., 2008, Abiogenic, microbial and hybrid authigenic carbonate crusts components of Precambrian stromatolites Geologia Croatica, v. 61, p. 73 103. RIDING, R., AND LIANG, L., 2005, Geobiology of microbial carbonates metazoan and seawater saturation state influences on secular trends during the Phanerozoic Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, v. 219, p. 101 115. ROBERTS, J.A., KENWARD, P.A., FOWLE, D.A., GOLDSTEIN, R.H., GONZA LEZ, L.A., AND MOORE, D.S., 2013, Surface chemistry allows for abiotic precipitation of dolomite at low temperature National Academy of Sciences USA , Proceedings, v. 110, p. 14540 14545. ROSENDAHL, B., MOHRIAK, W., NEMCOK, M., ODEGARD, M., TURNER, J., AND DICKSON, W., 2005, West African and Brazilian conjugate margins crustal types, architecture, and plate configurations 4th HGS PESGB International Conference on African Exploration and Production. ROSS, G., AND CHIARENZELLI, J., 1985, Paleoclimatic significance of widespread Proterozoic silcretes in the Bear and Churchill Provinces of the Northwestern Canadian Shield Journal of Sedimentary Petrology, v. 55, p. 196 204. SALLET, A., RUSHTON, S., BUAMBUA, L., INMAN, K., MCNEIL, R., AND DICKSON, J.A.D., 2016, Presalt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Bulletin, v. 100, p. 1135 1164. SCHALLER, H., 1973, Estratigrafia da Bacia de Campos XXVII Congresso Brasileiro de Geologia, Proceedings, p. 247 258. SHTUKENBERG, A.G., PUNIN, Y.O., GUNN, E., AND KAHR, B., 2012, Spherulites Chemical Reviews, v. 112, p. 1805 1838. SILVA-TELLES, A.C., 1992, Novo zoneamento de seque ncia das coquinas da Formac a o Lagoa Feia Neojiquia da Bacia de Campos com base em ostracodes aspectos evolutivos Sa o Paulo, 378 Congresso Brasileiro de Geologia, Proceedings, p. 489 490. SPADAFORA, A., PERRI, E., MCKENZIE, J.A., AND VASCONCELOS, C., 2010, Microbial biomineralization processes forming modern Ca Mg carbonate stromatolites Sedimentology, v. 57, p. 27 40. SPO TL, C., AND PITMAN, J.K., 1998, Saddle baroque dolomite in carbonates and sandstones a reappraisal of the burial-diagenetic concept, in Morad, S., ed., Carbonate 1313 Cementation in Sandstones International Association of Sedimentologists, Special Publication 26, p. 437 460. SZATMARI, P., 2000, Habitat of petroleum along the South Atlantic margins, in Mello, M., and Katz, B., eds., Petroleum Systems of South Atlantic Margins American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir 73, p. 69 75. TORSVIK, T.H., ROUSSE, S., LABAILS, C., AND SMETHURST, M.A., 2009, A new scheme for the opening of the South Atlantic Ocean and the dissection of an Aptian salt basin Geophysical Journal International, v. 177, p. 1315 1333. TOSCA, N.J., AND MASTERSON, A.L., 2014, Chemical controls on incipient Mg-silicate crystallization at 258C implications for early and late diagenesis Clay Minerals, v. 49, p. 165 194. TOSCA, N.J., AND WRIGHT, V.P., 2014, The formation and diagenesis of Mg-clay minerals in lacustrine carbonate reservoirs American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Annual Convention and Exhibition. TOSCA, N.J., AND WRIGHT, V.P., 2015, Diagenetic pathways linked to labile Mg-clays in lacustrine carbonate reservoirs a model for the origin of secondary porosity in the Cretaceous pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, offshore Brazil, in Armitage, P.J., Butcher, A.R., Churchill, J.M., Csoma, A.E., Hollis, C., Lander, R.H., Omma, J.E., and Worden, R.H., Reservoir Quality of Clastic and Carbonate Rocks Analysis, Modelling and Prediction Geological Society of London, Special Publication 435, doi.org 10.1144 SP435.1. TUCKER, M.E., AND WRIGHT, V.P., 1991, Carbonate Sedimentology Oxford, UK, Blackwell Scientific Publications, 482 p. TURNER, S., REGELOUS, M., KELLEY, S., HAWKESWORTH, C., AND MANTOVANI, M., 1994, Magmatism and continental break-up in the South Atlantic high precision 40Ar-39Ar geochronology Earth and Planetary Science Letters, v. 121, p. 333 348. VAN DER LAND, C., WOOD, R., WU, K., VAN DIJKE, M.I.J., JIANG, Z., CORBETT, P.W.M., AND COUPLES, G., 2013, Modelling the permeability evolution of carbonate rocks Marine and Petroleum Geology, v. 48, p. 1 7. VAN HOUTEN, F.B., AND PURUCKER, M.E., 1984, Glauconite peloids and chamosite ooids favourable factors, constraints and problems, Earth-Science Reviews, v. 20, p. 211 243. VASCONCELOS, C., WARTHMANN, R., MCKENZIE, J.A., VISSCHER, P.T., BITTERMANN, A.G., AND VAN LITH, Y., 2006, Lithifying microbial mats in Lagoa Vermelha, Brazil Modern Precambrian relics Sedimentary Geology, v. 185, p. 175 183. VINCENS, A., CASANOVA, J., AND TIERCELIN, J.J., 1986, Palaeolimnology of lake bogoria Kenya during the 4500 BP High lacustrine phase, in Frostick, L., ed., Sedimentation in the African Rifts Geological Society of London, Special Publication 25, p. 323 330. WARREN, J.K., 2006, Evaporites Sediments, Resources and Hydrocarbons Berlin, Springer Science, 1035 p. WEGER, R.J., EBERLI, G.P., BAECHLE, G.T., MASSAFERRO, J.L., AND SUN, Y., 2009, Quantification of pore structure and its effect on sonic velocity and permeability in carbonates American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Bulletin, v. 93, p. 1297 1317. WHITE, N., AND MCKENZIE, D., 1988, Formation of the steer s head geometry of sedimentary basins by differential stretching of the crust and mantle Geology, v. 16, p. 250 253. WINTER, W.R., JAHNERT, R.J., AND FRANC A, A.B., 2007, Bacia de Campos Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, v. 15, p. 511 529. WRIGHT, V.P., 2011, Reservoir architectures in non-marine carbonates American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Annual Convention and Exhibition, Proceedings, p. 75 89. WRIGHT, V.P., 2012, Lacustrine carbonates in rift settings the interaction of volcanic and microbial processes on carbonate deposition, in Garland, J., Neilson, J.E., Laubach, S., and Whidden, K.J., eds., Advances in Carbonate Exploration and Reservoir Analysis Geological Society of London, Special Publication 370, p. 39 47. WRIGHT, V.P., 2013, To be or not to be, microbial Does it matter Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Conference, Geological Society of London, Abstracts volume. WRIGHT, V.P., AND BARNETT, A.J., 2015, An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic Early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates, in Grotzinger, J.P., and James, N., eds., Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production The Geological Society of London, Special Publication 418, p. 209 219. Received 4 July 2016 accepted 10 October 2017.

[END_OF_PAPER]

SPECIAL TOPIC MODELLING INTERPRETATION Reinterpreting the South Atlantic Pre-Salt Microbialite reservoirs petrographic, isotopic and seismic evidence for a shallow evaporitic lake depositional model Paul Wright1 and Karyna Rodriguez 2 review the current controversy over the South Atlantic PreSalt Microbialite reservoirs and how the initial interpretations based on seismic data have been shown to be incorrect, opening up new possibilities for exploration. Introduction The first encounter of the Pre-Salt Aptian Microbialite carbonate reservoirs the Barra Velha Fm in 2005, in the Parati field, Santos Basin, was followed by additional discoveries such as the multi-billion barrel Lula Tupi field. Now, nearly 30 more discoveries have been made in the basin such as Libra and Sapinhoa, with recoverable reserves estimated as 30 BBOE, Figure 1 Santos Campos key discoveries and 2D seismic database used in this analysis. according to ANP. In addition, discoveries have been made in the adjacent Campos Basin, including the Pa o de Ac u car field Viera de Luca et al., 2017 , where the same unit is known as the Macabu Fm., and also in the Kwanza Basin, West Africa Saller et al., 2016 . After deposition in a late rift setting, the Barra Velha Fm and its equivalents were buried by more than 1 km of marine origin evaporites of the Ariri Fm and its equivalents, as the Albian Ocean seeped and poured into the basin. Depositional model understanding evolution From the initial discoveries the thick up to 550 m carbonate unit has been widely considered as representing lacustrine microbialite platforms Carminatti et al., 2009 Kattah, 2017, Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al., 2017 based on seismic geometries and naked eye similarities between well cores and outcrop samples. Microbialites are organosedimentary deposits that have accreted as a result of a benthic microbial community trapping and binding detrital sediment and or forming the locus of mineral precipitation Burne and Moore, 1987 . Stromatolites are among the most common examples of this type of carbonate. Seismic geometries indicating high relief structures, with relief of hundreds of metres with progradational and mounded geometries, have been assumed to represent large-scale build-ups Buckley et al., 2015 comparable to both Precambrian and later marine platforms. Marine microbialite platforms with growth relief of 600 m are known such as those hosting the supergiant oil and gas fields of the Pre-Caspian of Kazakhstan. However, extensive core recovery from the Santos Basin has shown that under the microscope, microbial textures are in fact rare in the Barra Velha Fm Wright and Barnett, 2015 and no examples of lacustrine build-ups of such scale are known from the geological record. The alternative model for the depositional setting of the Barra Velha Fm is that of extensive, hyper-alkaline, shallow evaporitic lakes Wright and Barnett, 2015 . To add to the complexity of understanding the reservoir, much of the porosity is interpreted as owing to the dissolution of former Mg-silicate clays Tosca and Wright, 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2017a . 1 PW Carbonate Geoscience 2 Spectrum Corresponding author, E-mail vpw pwcarbonategeoscience.com FIRST BREAK I VOLUME 36 I MAY 2018 71 SPECIAL TOPIC MODELLING INTERPRETATION Figure 3 Above Marine carbonate platform model with characteristic geometries caused by the relationship between changes in sea level and the rate of carbonate growth. Below Simplified controls and interactions affecting lake depositional systems. Figure 2 Conflicting depositional models for the South Atlantic pre-salt lacustrine carbonates. Above Microbialite differentiated platform model based on seismic relief. Below Connected shallow evaporitic lake model consistent with facies, isotopic and thermodynamic evidence. Seismic relief would be owing to syn- and post-depositional faulting. Figure 4 Crystal shrubs, in this case with inter-shrub porosity occluded by silica cement with some silica replacement. Thus, the conflicting interpretations on the gross setting high relief platforms or shallow, extensive lakes revolving in a large part on the interpretation or misinterpretation of seismic data over more than a decade Figure 2 . Lakes are not oceans Whereas seismic facies and reservoir facies models are well developed for marine carbonate systems, carbonate lakes are different in many fundamental aspects. In marine carbonates the dominant controls on gross stratal architecture, seismic geometry, facies and 72 FIRST BREAK I VOLUME 36 I MAY 2018 diagenetic potential are relative sea level changes, the type of carbonate factory producing the sediment Williams et al., 2011 and climate. Lake deposystems are controlled by often highly complex hydrological factors reflecting the interaction of local climate, tectonics and the composition of the catchment geology. Many lakes are highly sensitive to even small-scale climate changes, whereas oceans are highly buffered from such effects. Lakes are effectively tideless, being strongly influenced by wave action yet owing to the limited size of most lakes limiting fetch wave base is relatively shallow resulting in thinner clean sands whether carbonate or siliciclastic in composition. One especially relevant difference for the pre-salt is the fact that evaporitic lakes in particular are associated with highly diverse and complex varieties of authigenic clays, in contrast to the relatively small range of clays found in marine sediments. The presence of Mg-rich clays as evaporite products, while lacking more typical marine evaporites such as halite and gypsum, is a characteristic of lakes draining basic igneous terrains such as those surrounding the Barra Velha Fm lakes. The formation and subsequent dissolution of the Mg clay stevensite in the Aptian lakes was a crucial factor in producing excellent reservoir quality, as such clays undergo congruent dissolution to leave porosity Tosca and Wright, 2015 . With these and many other differences between lacustrine and marine carbonate systems, extrapolating models and concepts from marine reservoirs to the non-marine Pre-Salt has been a contributory factor to the continued misinterpretation of critical seismic and lithological characteristics Figure 3 . What is the Barra Velha Fm made of The Barra Velha reservoirs are remarkably uniform in terms of their composition, comprising just two main grain types which SPECIAL TOPIC MODELLING INTERPRETATION cylcothems which unusually for the Barra Velha Fm do contain some microbial textures. These cyclothems are of very shallow water origin yet are now separated in some wells by hundreds of metres of vertical relief, and as much as 1 km in some cases, prior to salt deposition Wright and Barnett, 2107b . Thus, there is a problem. Was the Santos Basin littered with lacustrine platforms with hundreds of metres of relief or more Was the formation deposited in very shallow lakes and and did it then undergo significant uplift prior, during and or after to salt deposition Figure 5 Calcite spherulites, here showing porosity after the dissolution of Mg silicate clays. are either in-situ or reworked Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2017a . The best reservoir facies consist of in-situ cm-sized crystal shrubs Figure 4 made of radiating fibrous calcites and resembling abiotic travertines. The other key components are mm-sized spherulites, made of radially arranged fibrous calcite, but not laminated as in ooids. These spherulites appear to have at least in part grown within silicate gels later transformed into stevensite clay and subsequently dissolved, producing excellent porosity Figure 5 . The shrubs and spherulites can be reworked into a range of different textures indicating frequent erosion of which the finest products are thin 0.3 m , laminated carbonate muds containing fish and invertebrate remains indicating periods of fresher waters. The coarsest reworked facies consist of well-sorted grainstones, which can have excellent reservoir quality. The association of grain types and their diagenesis and porosity formation are unique to the Barra Velha-type facies Wright and Barnett, 2017a and its equivalent in the Campos Basin Herlinger et al., 2017 and Kwanza Basins Saller et al., 2016 . Despite the seemingly indiscriminate use of the name Microbialite , demonstrable microbial macro- and microstructures are very rare in the formation as a whole, comprising 1 of its thickness Wright and Barnett, 2015 . Although these unusual lithologies are commonly interbedded on a decimetre-to-metre scale, they do occur in cyclothems up to nearly 6 m thick, consisting of a basal unit of laminated mudstones, overlain by in situ spherulites and then by in-situ shrub units. Wright and Barnett 2015 interpreted these as likely evaporite cycles, a view supported by thermodynamic geochemical modelling Wright and Tosca, 2016 . Although uncertainties exist over the exact chemical conditions producing these exotic carbonates and clays, what can be inferred is that the Aptian lakes were hyper alkaline and prone to evaporation. Wright and Barnett 2017b identified possible trends in carbon and oxygen isotopic data from the Barra Velha Fm comparable to those from Quaternary lakes in the East African rift to further support the Barra Velha lakes as having been shallow and evaporitic. In the uppermost few 10 metres of the formation, across Santos Basin, there are a series of distinctive gamma log spikes called the Lula s Fingers that represent shallowing-upwards Seismic database and quality issues High-quality seismic data is essential for both detailed and more regional evaluations of the proven pre-salt plays. Seismic data available for this analysis consists of more than 13,000 km Phase 1 acquired in 2012 with 10.2 km of offsets, a 10 m source and a 15 m-deep cable tow, and 17,000 km Phase 2 acquired in late 2016 with 12 km of offsets, 8 m source and a 15m-deep cable tow Figure 1 . For salt interpretation, low-frequency RTM imaging was used. In salt basins 2D data has inherent limitations where a significant amount of energy can be considered to be out-of-plane. With its ability to image overturned beds, the RTM gives a better and cleaner image than the Kirchhoff, but there will still be salt bodies where imaging uncertainty is great. However, with 2D data it is relatively fast to run salt scenario testing and derive a salt model that will optimally image both the base and pre-salt in both acquisition directions nominal strike and dip . With low-frequency optimized RTM and multi-directional Figure 6 2012 RTM PSDM data compared to public SP99 data, showing that the pre-salt section is not imaged in the public data. Replacing the public line with a nearby 2012 line, the pre-salt section is seen to be well-imaged. FIRST BREAK I VOLUME 36 I MAY 2018 73 SPECIAL TOPIC MODELLING INTERPRETATION surface definition a somewhat interactive interpretation scenario testing was applied. This processing sequence resulted in an excellent image at pre-salt level from the final RTM Reverse Time Migration PSDM Pre-satck Depth Migration datasets. A comparison of the 2012 dataset with publicly available seismic data Figure 6 illustrates the importance of data quality in evaluating the pre-salt section. Potential pre-salt structures analogous to discoveries are clearly indicated in the 2012 RTM PSDM dataset, whereas there is negligible imaging at pre-salt level in the public data. Seismic characteristics of lacustrine carbonates If lacustrine carbonate platforms had developed and grown, as have marine equivalents, instead of forming a cover on existing structural highs, as was the case in the Cretaceous Toca platforms of West Africa, a specific localized carbonate source factory would be needed and one with limited diffusivity Williams et al., 2011 . In marine systems, this is achieved by high levels of production by light-dependent groups, associated with sediments Figure 7 Sub-lacustrine carbonate mound now exhumed by lake level fall in Pyramid Lake, Nevada. This structure, some 105 m high was produced by carbonate precipitated around vents where calcium-rich waters mixed with alkaline lake waters. Such structures are likely to have highly complex internal geometries and might not produce any internal seismic geometries. of low transportability and extensive early cementation, or by microbial factories. However, such organisms are not present in the Pre-Salt carbonate successions and neither shows evidence of any microbial factory. An alternative view held in some companies is that the platforms represent subaerial travertine or tufa deposits where carbonate-charged fluids, either as a point or linear source, promote rapid precipitation of carbonates, with a rapid decrease in carbonate production away from the source. Studies of a wide range of travertine build-ups show their limited size because their feeder vents are intermittent and shift positions. The relief on these build-ups is typically decametre-scale and rarely up to 40-50 m, but progradation lengths are relatively short a few to several hundred metres at most . The range of stacking geometries commonly seen in marine carbonate build-ups and a useful discriminator for identifying carbonate build-ups Burgess et al., 2013 , are apparently absent in travertines, although down-stepping relationships are seen. Thick 200 m and extensive travertine accumulations are known e.g. Turkey but these are likely to be composed of multiple decametre wedge-shaped units consisting of individual travertine cone, mound or ridges systems of limited volumes and extent. Seismic-scale differentiated platforms with topsets, margins and slopes are unlikely to form in travertine systems. Evidence for feeder systems such as faults would support a possible travertine origin but many vent fractures are sub-seismic-scale. While possible hydrothermal vent complexes have been identified from the rift stage successions in the Campos Basin Alvarenga et al., 2016 , none have been described in detail from the Barra Velha Fm or its equivalents. However, isolated carbonate mounds could be produced both by subaerial and sub-lacustrine vent-related systems. Mound-like features with relief of 400 m have been reported from the Barra Velha Fm Buckley et al., 2015 . Sub-lacustrine build-ups, related again to vent activity, are known to reach heights of 100 m in extant lakes Figure 7 , but any such large build-ups would require growth in lakes of similar water depths. Geochemical models for the Bara Velha Fm carbonates suggest formation in shallow lakes rather than deep ones. A more likely explanation for these cone-like features on seismic data is that they are volcanic cones or even inversion features. Figure 8 Seismic features, responses and effects associated with marine carbonate platforms. 74 FIRST BREAK I VOLUME 36 I MAY 2018 SPECIAL TOPIC MODELLING INTERPRETATION Figure 9 None of the discoveries analysed on the 2D dataset meet the Burgess et al. seismic criteria for carbonate platform identification high angle margins, thickening of reflectors and increases in steepness, seismic facies differentiation, onlap, fracturing and collapse, truncated reflectors karst, depositional wings, preferences for antecedant topography drilled on structural highs but not proven to be preferentially developed on these , stacking geometries and drowning responses, compactional drape, pull up, deformation zones and high amplitude caps. Characterizing carbonate build-ups on seismic data Some studies Liechoski et al., 2017 have detected the presence of carbonate platforms in Santos Basin like those of marine systems. Regardless of the likelihood that lacustrine build-ups would be different to marine forms, discriminating carbonate build-ups from other features, such as fault blocks or buried hills, has been facilitated by a workflow from Burgess et al. 2013 . These authors identify a range of criteria that can be used for assessing the likelihood of a feature being a carbonate build-up and also rank those criteria most useful. When trying to identify whether a bump could be a carbonate build-up, marine or otherwise, these categories of criteria can be assessed Figure 8 Features Characteristic features of carbonate build-ups that are commonly seen on seismic data. Behaviours responses reflecting characteristic depositional behaviours of carbonate build-ups commonly shown on seismic data. Effects responses of associated strata after the build-up is buried. Features include high-angle margins, thickening of reflectors and increases in steepness, seismic facies differentiation, onlap, fracturing and collapse, truncated reflectors karst, depositional wings. Behaviours include preferences for antecedant topography, stacking geometries and drowning responses. Effects include compactional drape, pull-up, deformation zones, high amplitude caps. Whether one uses the ranking approach by Burgess et al. 2013 or a simpler approach outlined above, the criteria are not met in the illustrations provided by Liechoski et al. 2017 . Similarly, none of the discoveries analysed using the 2D datasets available meet the criteria for a carbonate platform Figure 9 . Barra Velha depositional environment evidence from seismic data Layered seismic geometries Figure 9 suggest a low relief depositional setting. However, the main challenge is explaining the significant seismic relief. In order to investigate the discrepancy Figure 10 Dip and strike line through a major discovery in Santos Basin with interpretation of the Barra Velha Formation between base salt pink horizon and base of carbonate sequence blue horizon . Note the truncational geometry of blue horizon implying an erosional episode at the start of the deposition of the carbonate sequence. between observations at micro and macro scales, a seismic facies analysis was carried out using the regional 2D seismic dataset covering the Santos Basin. The seismic sequence associated with the Barra Velha Fm was found to have a distinctive low frequency, relatively uniform, varying from high amplitude to semi acoustically opaque, character. It was seen thinning on to structurally high areas and potentially missing at various structural culminations. It lies directly beneath the base of a thick evaporite sequence and at its base is usually marked by an unconformity which seems to truncate the sequence below Figure 10 . All these are important observations in trying to understand the depositional model of the Barra Velha and trying to relate it to the evaporitic shallow lake model. However, the major revelation came from flattening at the base of the evaporite sequence Figure 11 . The Barra Velha s distinctive character is then seen to be extensive and relatively uniform across both present-day highs and lows. This, together with other observations made using this flattened display, is surprisingly in agreement with and largely supports the shallow water lake model. There is also evidence of internal onlap suggesting local tectonism which could also explain the extensive reworking of the carbonates and possible fan-delta facies and porous grainstones. FIRST BREAK I VOLUME 36 I MAY 2018 75 SPECIAL TOPIC MODELLING INTERPRETATION Figure 11 Barra Velha sequence is observed to be extensive and relatively uniform below base salt, consistent with extensive log correlation of Barra Velha facies across Santos Basin. This supports the extensive shallow water lake model. Some thickening implying syn-depositional subsidence with factory keeping up and some indication of post-depositional faulting. Figure 12 Barra Velha seismic character extending into the present-day low areas. Unexplored structural closures have been mapped off the structural high blocks. Small scale faulting could indicate syn-Barra Velha deformation which could also indicate presence of the fan delta facies. tionally, as the same facies are found in the West African basins, the Barra Velha may extend well beyond into the unexplored areas to the east. So while reservoir facies presence is likely, reservoir quality is dependent in part on either identifying likely fan delta facies or where the clays have dissolved. Figure 13 Barra Velha seismic character extending into the present-day low areas. Unexplored structural closures have been mapped off the structural high blocks. Small scale faulting could indicate syn-Barra Velha deformation which could also indicate presence of the fan delta facies. There are models which can explain post-Barra Velha deformation. Deposition of salt causes rapid loading of the basin, so that further basin subsidence can occur and mobile salt can be drained from structurally higher zones into the subsiding basins. Seismic evidence indicates that downslope salt drainage occurred before any sediment overburden accumulated Davison et al., 2012 . This is a feedback process that can result in significant subsidence where salt bodies are thicker Figure 12 . Conclusion With increased competition from oil companies in these basins, access to one of the most prolific play types in the world will come from a good understanding and integration of the micro and macro scale characteristics which clearly indicate a shallow water lake depositional model. This, together with access to a good-quality regional dataset should allow for identification of the more subtle traps that have not been targeted and which may be ignored by companies aiming to only explore the clear analogues to discoveries so far. Huge additional potential is indicated by this model, painting a very exciting future for a well-informed exploration campaign. References Alvarenga, R.S., Iacopini, D., Kuchle, J., Scherer, C.M.S. and Goldberg, K. 2016 . Seismic characteristics and distribution of hydrothermal vent complexes in the Cretaceous offshore rift section of the Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 74, 12-25. Future Barra Velha exploration opportunities As the BV reservoir represents shallow lake deposits, the potential is for similar facies being present off the main structural blocks and for a range of more subtle traps Figure 13 . Addi76 FIRST BREAK I VOLUME 36 I MAY 2018 Buckley, J.P., Bosence, D. and Elders, C. 2015 . Tectonic setting and stratigraphic architecture of an Early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonate platform, Sugar Loaf High, Santos Basin, Brazil. Geological Society, London, Special Publications no. 418, 175-191. SPECIAL TOPIC MODELLING INTERPRETATION Burgess P.M., Winefield, P., Marcello Minzoni, M. and Chris, E. 2013 . Tosca, N.J. and Wright, V.P. 2015 . Diagenetic pathways linked to Methods for identification of isolated carbonate buildups from labile Mg-clays in lacustrine carbonate reservoirs a model for the seismic reflection data. AAPG Bulletin, 97, 1071 1098. origin of secondary porosity in the Cretaceous pre-salt Barra Velha Burne, R.V and Moore, L.S. 1987 . Microbialites organosedimentary deposits of benthic microbial communities. Palaios, 2, 255 262. Formation, offshore Brazil. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 435, http doi.org 10.1144 SP435.1. Carminatti, M., Dias, J.L. and Wolff, B. 2009 . From turbidites to Viera de Luca, P.H., Matias, H., Carballo, J. 2017 . Breaking barriers carbonates breaking paradigms in deep waters. Offshore Technology and paradigms in Pre-Salt exploration the Pa o de Ac u car discovery, Conference, 20124. offshore Brazil . AAPG Memoir, 113, 177-194. Davison, I., Anderson, L., Nuttall, P. 2012 . Salt deposition, loading and Williams, H.D. 2011 . Investigating carbonate platform types Multiple gravity drainage in the Campos and Santos salt basins. Geological controls and a continuum of geometries. Journal of Sedimentary Society London Special Publications, 363 1 , 159-174. Research, 81, 18-37. Herlinger, R. jr., Zambonato, E.E. and Fernando de Ros, L. 2017 . Wright, V.P. and Barnett, A.J. 2015 . An abiotic model for the develop- Influence of diagenesis on the quality of lower Cretaceous Pre- ment of textures in some South Atlantic Early Cretaceous lacustrine Salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs from northern Campos Basin, carbonates. Geological Society, London, Special Publications no. offshore Brazil. Journal of Sedimentary Research, 87, 1285 1313. 418, p. 209-219. http dx.doi.org 10.1144 SP418.3. Liechoscki de Paula Faria, D., Tadeu dos Reis, A. and Gomes de Souza, Wright, V.P. and Barnett, A.J. 2017a . Classifying Reservoir Carbonates O. jr. 2017 . Three-dimensional stratigraphic-sedimentological for- When the Status Quo Simply Does Not Work A Case Study from ward modelling of an Aptian carbonate reservoir deposited during the the Cretaceous of the South Atlantic. AAPG Search and Discovery, sag stage in the Santos basin, Brazil. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 88, 676-695. Article 51419 2017 . Wright, V.P. and Barnett, A.J. 2017b . Critically Evaluating the Cur- Kattah, S. 2017 . Exploration Opportunities in the Pre-Salt Play, rent Depositional Models for the Pre-Salt Barra Velha Formation, Deepwater Campos Basin, Brazil. The Sedimentary record, 15, 4-8, Offshore Brazil. AAPG Search and Discovery, Article 51439 doi 10.21110 sedred.2017.1. Saller, A., Rushton, S., Buambua, L., Inman, K., McNeil, R. and Dickson, J.A.D. 2016 . Presalt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola. 2017 . Wright, V.P. and Tosca, N.J. 2016 . A Geochemical Model for the Formation of the Pre-Salt Reservoirs, Santos Basin, Brazil Implications for Understanding Reservoir Distribution. AAPG Search and Discovery, Article 51304. AAPG Bulletin, 100, 1135 1164. FIRST BREAK I VOLUME 36 I MAY 2018 77

[END_OF_PAPER]

Marine and Petroleum Geology 124 2021 104829 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Marine and Petroleum Geology journal homepage www.elsevier.com locate marpetgeo Research paper 3D modelling of flow units and petrophysical properties in brazilian presalt carbonate Rodrigo Penna a, b, , Wagner Moreira Lupinacci a a Exploratory Interpretation and Reservoir Characterization Group GIECAR , Department of Geology and Geophysics, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Nitero i, RJ, Brazil b Petrobras, Av. Republica do Chile, 65, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T Keywords Flow units Seismic quantitative interpretation Presalt reservoir 3D reservoir modelling Petrophysical modelling Rock typing into flow units FU is a well-known technique for characterizing flow heterogeneities in reservoirs and producing reliable estimations of petrophysical properties, as porosity and permeability. Several methods that correlate pore-throat size with permeability and porosity in the core and well-log domains are available in the literature, being the flow zone indicator FZI method the most common used in both clastic and carbonate reservoirs. Extrapolating the flow units rock typing from the core and well-log scales into the whole reservoir is a major challenge due to the lack of correlation with sedimentological facies and available data scale differences. Most 3D generations of flow units and petrophysical properties are merely a geostatistical procedure, without any spatial data constraints like seismic attribute . We propose a new approach to create flow units occurrence probability volumes as well as seismic derived porosities and permeabilities that are more robust than the usual estimate of petrophysical properties considering sedimentological facies. Considering the seismic scale charac teristics and using the concept of decametre flow units and quantitative seismic interpretation in a Brazilian presalt dataset, we indirectly quantified superimposed small-scale effects that obliterate generate porosity on a larger scale and established a minimum number of correlatable FUs with elastic seismic attributes. We produced 3D volumes of permeability and porosity that are still capable of obtaining complex reservoir flow characteristics and could be directly considered as variables in lateral interpolation of reservoir parameters, seismic 4D in terpretations and seismic-assisted history matching. 1. Introduction Generation of adequate static and dynamic models provides better subsidy for the decision-making process, especially in enhanced oil re covery production. For any asset team working in complex geology settings, as Brazilian presalt carbonates, an assertive description of reservoir heterogeneity and flow behavior in terms of fluid movement is crucial. In that sense, working with flow units in carbonate settings can present an advantage over sedimentary or lithological facies, as it pro vides better estimation of reservoir petrophysical characteristics. In the presence of complex geological settings with differential diagenesis, the estimation of porosity and permeability k performed on a flow unit FU basis should be more accurate than lithological or sedimentary facies, as discussed by Aggoun et al. 2006 , Daraei et al. 2017 , Hatampour et al. 2018 , Ghanbarian et al. 2019 . Because flow units do not have any correlation with lithological facies, their incorporation into 3D static models that are essentially built on sedimentological premises can be very disappointing. Depending on the diagenetic history, same lithological facies deposited at a given highenergy setting, for example, can present distinct flow behavior. These rocks would group at the same sedimentological facies, but at different reservoir rock typing RRT and flow units because of the distinct porosity generation obliteration processes. In addition, the difference in scales and the lack of correlation between well logs and seismic data makes the propagation of the petrophysical properties into 3D geolog ical model problematic and purely a geostatistical approach, often resulting in non-realistic flow models. Examples of lateral extrapolations of flow units and petrophysical properties considering only well data are found in Testerman 1962 , Svirsky et al. 2004 and Li et al. 2018 . Flow units are rarely a considered technique for geophysicists Corresponding author. Exploratory Interpretation and Reservoir Characterization Group GIECAR , Department of Geology and Geophysics, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Nitero i, RJ, Brazil. E-mail address rpenna petrobras.com.br R. Penna . https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2020.104829 Received 22 July 2020 Received in revised form 18 November 2020 Accepted 18 November 2020 Available online 28 November 2020 0264-8172 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. R. Penna and W. Moreira Lupinacci Marine and Petroleum Geology 124 2021 104829 Fig. 1. a Mero Field is located on the northeastern portion of the Santos Basin, southeast Brazil, close to the Cabo Frio high that separates it from Campos Basin. b Base of salt horizon top of the Barra Velha Formation displays an elongated N S structure. 17 wells in the study area are represented by circles. working with quantitative seismic interpretation QSI . In literature, the main publications related to QSI Avseth et al., 2005 Dvorkin et al., 2016 Vernik, 2016 does not mention any definition or workflow to identify and map the FU from elastic seismic attributes. Prasad 2003 is one of the few publications on the usage of flow units constraining seismic velocity-permeability relations. The author showed that grouping and sorting rocks into flow units had strong relationship be tween P-wave velocity and absolute permeability within each FU in the analyzed dataset. Recent publications correlate flow units with multiple seismic attri butes, producing constrained tridimensional petrophysical properties of porosity and permeability Rastegarnia et al., 2016 Iravani et al., 2018 Hatampour et al., 2018 . Iravani et al. 2018 considered a single FU regression from the well-log data for the entire reservoir, having the acoustic impedance volume as constraint for the lateral interpolation of petrophysical properties. Rastegarnia et al. 2016 and Hatampour et al. 2018 used intelligent systems, like probabilistic neural networks and radial basis function networks, to obtain linear relationships between FU 2 R. Penna and W. Moreira Lupinacci Marine and Petroleum Geology 124 2021 104829 Fig. 2. a A three-layer wedge model. b Synthetic seismogram of the wedge model. c Apparent orange line versus real thickness black dashed line graph and the amplitude variation black line from the top of the negative peak. d Acoustic P impedance wedge model. e Smoothed P-impedance wedge model for the frequency content obtained from the seismic inversion. f Apparent orange line versus real thicknesses black dashed line from P-impedance wedge model. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. and seismic attributes. The mentioned methods that correlate FU and seismic attributes, are simply an extrapolation of FU classification based on core and well log data into the seismic resolution, regardless of the scale difference between data types. For most cases, the geological setting of the area is a sand-shale intercalation, where a small number of flow units is enough to characterize the reservoir behavior in terms of fluid movement. In more complex geology settings, where numerous FUs are calculated, the lack of seismic vertical resolution must be considered in the process. We propose a methodology for calculating better seismic derived petrophysical volumes, characterizing large-scale flow characteristics of the reservoir considering flow units as constraints. Using percentiles and a cumulative S-curve in permeability and porosity core measurements from the Mero Field, a Brazilian presalt carbonate reservoir, we calcu lated a significant number of flow units that correlates with seismic elastic attributes and respond for the large-scale flow characteristics in the reservoir, maintaining part of the local flow complexity Penna and Lupinacci, 2020 . Within each FU, we establish petrophysical relations that calculates more accurate seismic derived 3D volumes of porosity and permeability and compared to volumes calculated using sedimen tological k- relations. volume of between 8 and 12 billion BOE Carlotto et al., 2017 , with high geological complexity in terms of stratigraphic facies Penna et al., 2019 Penna and Lupinacci, 2020 . Main reservoir rocks of the Mero Field are bivalve rudstones co quinas from the Itapema Formation Barremian and shrubs and spherulites from the Barra Velha Formation Aptian , although high porosity is also found in bioclastic grainstones, packstones, wackestones and others carbonate related facies Jesus et al., 2019 Gomes et al., 2020 . Low porosity fine-grained carbonates, such as mudstone classi fied, for simplification, as microporous sediments are distinguishable, as well as extrusive and intrusive igneous rocks. Because of the lack of vertical resolution and rock high incompressibility characteristics, Mero seismic data can only distinguish a simplified lithology classification that comprises carbonates, microporous carbonates, and igneous rocks, as discussed by Penna et al. 2019 . Mero reservoir, like other Brazilian presalt carbonates, shows many static and dynamic indications of fracturing in different stratigraphic levels. However, it is very hard to identify relevant and consistent fractured intervals in well logs and borehole images, especially when the fracture opening are small this is common due to the high compaction of these reservoirs, and core data tend to highly overestimate fracture opening due to the uncompressing effect at sea level . At decametric scale, however, dissolution and neomorphism, replacement of minerals, silicification and dolomitization are the main effects that controls porosity generation and or obliteration and fluid movements in the reservoir Herlinger et al., 2017 Gomes et al., 2020 . Approximately 500 m of cores were taken in different stratigraphic intervals. The dataset comprises about 1700 laboratory core and plug measurements of porosity and permeability from 17 wells, containing both the Barra Velha and Itapema formations. The seismic data is a legacy seismic acquisition that cover an area of 2484 km2, 8 km streamer 2. Study area and data avaliable The present study is developed using a Mero Field database composed of core, well log and seismic data. This field is a part of the giant Libra discovery, located in the northeastern portion of the Santos Basin, ultra-deep water of the Atlantic Ocean Fig. 1 . Libra Prospect comprises a 2013 consortium of Petrobras operator , Shell, Total, CNOOC and CNPC, under the new Brazilian production-sharing contract for presalt areas. Libra Prospect initial estimates indicate an oil in place 3 R. Penna and W. Moreira Lupinacci Marine and Petroleum Geology 124 2021 104829 Fig. 4. a Porosity versus permeability regressions per flow units according to the discretization proposed in Table 1. b Porosity versus permeability re gressions per lithology description. Fig. 3. a SMLP from the core permeability and porosity measurements. b Depth versus accumulated normalized FZI values, also evidencing the same FU orders of variation. We can observe higher green lines and lower black lines orders of flow units. Fm. and top of basement. In this inversion method, a minimum number of interfaces continuously simulates the seismic trace in a recursive and iterative scheme. The derived errors from the comparison of the syn thetic and the real seismic data should be minimized. Details of the sparse spike inversion method and others available in the industry are found in Veeken and Da Silva 2004 . Table 1 FU and log FZI cut-offs from the FZI S-curve. Log FZI values FU1 FU2 FU3 FU4 below 0.5 0.5 to 0.67 0.67 to 1.49 above 1.49 3. Seismic data scale analysis An important issue to be addressed in the characterization of flow units through elastic volumes is the difference in scales between data and the magnitude of the feasible discretization using available seismic data. In terms of lateral resolution, the seismic scale is relative to the bin size of the seismic acquisition 6.25 25 m. For the seismic vertical resolution, the minimum thickness of a given layer that the seismic data can resolve separation between top and base of layer interface with the correct thickness is related to the frequency content, the compressional P wave velocity of the medium, and the shape of wavelet Kallweit and Wood, 1982 . Any layer below the minimum vertical thickness will fall into the phenomenon known as tuning, where the amplitudes brighten or diminish due to the constructive and destructive interferences be tween overlapping seismic reflectors associated with thin layers. Usu ally, the minimum thickness is considered as one quarter of the signal wavelength Kallweit and Wood, 1982 . The seismic data used in this work has frequency content, in the presalt section, between 5 and 35 Hz, with a peak frequency of 15 Hz, and the wavelet phase close to zero degrees for the existing spectra. Based on the frequency content information, an effective way to assess the tuning thickness is through the construction of a wedge model, as shown in Fig. 2. We considered for the central wedge layer an average cable length and 6.25 25 m grid. This seismic data was reprocessed in 2016 with an initial tilted transversely isotropic TTI velocity model over an area of 2900 km2 and a vertical transversely isotropic full waveform inversion VTI-FWI from 3 Hz to 45 Hz. Then a multi-layer tomography using both Kirchhoff and Reverse Time Migration RTM picks was performed, followed by a TTI-FWI from 7 Hz to 8 Hz applied at the entire geologic sequence pos-salt, salt and presalt . High and lowsalt velocities layers, like anhydrite, taquidrite, carnalite and silvinite, as well as igneous rocks, within the salt stratification, were incorporated for the velocity model. Seifert et al. 2017 provides more details and discussions about this procedure. We used a model-based constrained sparse-spike prestack seismic inversion Pendrel, 2001 , calculated from six partial angle stacks of the reprocessed RTM data with the well log information of 17 wells drilled in the area. The low-frequency model was built through a lateral interpolation of the acoustic impedance PI , shear impedance SI and density logs. The stratigraphic control is constrained by four interpreted seismic horizons top of the Barra Velha Fm., top and base of the Itapema 4 R. Penna and W. Moreira Lupinacci Marine and Petroleum Geology 124 2021 104829 Fig. 5. FZI rock typing applied to wells 1, 3 and 7 using the cut-offs defined in Table 1. FU1 correspond to the worse decametre flow unit in term of reservoir flow performance, while FU4 denotes high-permeability facies. The first track is the sedimentary classification and the last track is the flow unit classification. value of acoustic impedance that represents a flow unit with good per moporous conditions surrounded by layers with low permoporous. The wedge thickness varies from 270 m to zero. Apparent thickness is measured from the bottom of the positive peak to the top of the negative peak dashed line . In Fig. 2, the tuning thickness is obtained from the lowest value of seismic amplitude, which for this model is approximately 60 m. When the wedge is thinner than this, the apparent thickness de viates from the real thickness. This means that the resolution for the flow units is approximately 60 m, if we directly use the seismic amplitude as constraint. An advantage of using elastic volumes over seismic amplitude data is the frequency gain due to the low and high frequency content incor porated during the seismic inversion process. Hill 2005 provides a discussion on this subject, showing that the use of inversion data can provide a reliable thickness estimation of about 1 3 of the tuning thickness. For our seismic inversion method, we considered a sparse-spike algorithm who calculates a blocked impedance volume. The sparse-spike inversion technique is defined through an Lp norm with p 1 applied in the parameter model of the objective function, which favors discontinuous functions in the first derivative of the model Aster et al., 2004 . A blocked impedance solution is only possible through an iterative method that increases the higher frequency content, that is, it increases the resolution. For instance, Aster et al. 2004 states that once you apply the L1 norm in the parameter model, the problem becomes non-linear and for its solution it is necessary to use, for example, the IRLS iteratively reweighted least-squares method. As result in a reflectivity inversion, the reflected pulses become more compressed and well localized and the solution resembles a sparse series of spikes Oliveira and Lupinacci, 2013 . Wang 2014 shows how the amplitude spectra of inverted reflectivity series increases from each iteration using the sparse-spike solution. Gradually, at each iteration, the spectrum is flattened through the increasing high frequency content on the reflectivity series. We evaluate the vertical resolution gain using the same wedge model described in Fig. 2, but now using the impedance data to estimate the apparent thickness. For this, the wedge model in acoustic impedance was smoothed to the same frequency content of the elastic parameter volumes 0 60 Hz obtained after the prestack inversion. Apparent thickness is measured between the top and bottom transition with constant impedance value dashed line . We note that now the real and apparent thicknesses are equal after 23 m, a considerable gain compared to the 62 m from the amplitude seismic data. The minimum thickness from inversion is named in this work as the minimum inversion thickness. The vertical resolution of Mero data indicates that the flow units discretized by the seismic inversion data will have decametre scales. This means that every distinct effect that obliterates or generates porosity identified at centimetric or metric scales will be expressed 5 R. Penna and W. Moreira Lupinacci Marine and Petroleum Geology 124 2021 104829 Fig. 6. P-impedance and S-impedance crossplots top and histograms bottom of the RQI FZI flow units distributions in the filtered elastic domain with the probability density functions pdfs for each FU. Left plots correspond to the Barra Velha Formation and right plots correspond to the Itapema Formation. Fig. 7. Bayesian classification of RQI FZI flow units in decametric seismic inversion scale in Well 9. Note that the lower vertical resolution intrinsic in inverted data results in some vertical detectability loss of thin layers. differently at lower scales. When rock typing for decametre flow units, we are characterizing the combined diagenetic effect from several cen timetric higher frequency variations. Rock typing for flow units core or well log data produces different results compared to seismic data, although both represent different stages of the geological building pro cess of a reservoir Penna and Lupinacci, 2020 . RQI 0.0314. k . E 1 Then, the FZI is calculated as FZI 4. Flow units classification RQI , Z 2 where FZI is given in m and Z defines as a normalized porosity on the form E 1 E . Taking log on both sides of Eq. 2 and rearranging, we have The most documented method for rock typing into flow units in clastic and carbonate reservoirs is the RQI FZI rock quality index flow zone indicator method. Since Amaefule and Altunbay 1993 intro duced the classification based on the Kozeny equations Kozeny, 1927 Carman, 1937 , the method is widely used due to its simplicity and consistent results. The analysis is based on the permeability k in mD and effective porosity E ratio, where the index RQI in m is logRQI logFZI log Z . 3 Considering Eq. 3 , a constant value of FZI produces an inclined straight line in log-log plot of RQI versus Z Amaefule and Altunbay, 1993 . Samples with similar flow characteristics and, consequently, same FZI values, cluster around a corresponding unit-slope, determining 6 R. Penna and W. Moreira Lupinacci Marine and Petroleum Geology 124 2021 104829 Fig. 8. NW-SE a seismic amplitude, c P- and d S-impedance sections resulting from the sparse-spike prestack inversion. b The interpreted horizons are, from top to bottom, base of salt, top of the Itapema Formation, base of the Itapema Formation and the Basement. e Mero Field baseline with the NW-SE section. a flow unit. Samples with different FZI values are plotted on different parallel lines and grouped in distinct flow units. Clustering core data and FZI values into flow units can be performed in different approaches, depending on the complexity of the reservoir and classification objectives. As FZI is strongly dependent on perme ability and usually exhibits log-normal distribution, a histogram dis cretization of log FZI values can be enough in relatively simple geology areas. Other clustering methods like iterative multi-linear regressions were detailed by Al-Ajmi and Holditch 2000 . Penna and Lupinacci 2020 used percentiles and cumulative S-curves to produce a significant number of flow units aiming decametre flow characterization. In Penna and Lupinacci 2020 , different methodologies for creating a minimum amount of flow units in the well domain were performed, along with a seismic feasibility study considering the vertical scale characteristics of the seismic data. FZI is considered a robust method of permeability estimation and reservoir prediction in terms of flow heterogeneities, due to petro physical correlations between permeability and flow units see e.g. Emami Niri and Lumley 2016 and Iravani et al., 2018 . Despite being widely used in the industry to characterize flow behavior in reservoirs, the FZI method is purely petrophysics. Concepts as depositional envi ronments, sedimentological texture and grain type are not considered in the flow unit classification. This is the main problem with the FZI technique and flow units rock typing, because, due to the lack of cor relation with the local geology, is extremely difficult to propagate the flow units in a sedimentary-based geological model. Furthermore, obtaining seismic attributes correlations to use as constraints to geo statistical procedures is often incipient due to the scale difference be tween the core and seismic data. We calculated the stratigraphic modified Lorenz plot SMLP Gunter et al., 1997 using the storage capacity and flow capacity of both Barra Velha and Itapema formations from the core laboratory permeability and porosity measurements Fig. 3 . In Gunter et al. 1997 proposed that the interpretation of each FU is performed observing the slope of the curve flat segments corresponds to seals or baffle zones, as they may present some level of porosity, but have no contribution of permeability. Steep segments correspond to speed zones of the reservoir, they can have low or high porosity, but provide major contributions to the reservoir flow performance in terms of fluid movement. In this study, we did not used the SMLP to address any discretization in terms of FU. We did use as a graphic tool to indicate how FUs will present at different scales. This is a concept like sequence stratigraphy studies where higher and lower orders of cyclicity can be individualized using the Wheeler Diagram Wheeler, 1958 for example, as a graphic tool. We can measure different scales in the SMLP plot. Higher and lower orders of slope variations are present, expressed by the green higher order and black lower order lines in Fig. 3. We see clearly that vari ations of the low and high frequency are correlational since the slope of the low frequency curve depends on the constructive effect of each high frequency curve. Considering the study s objectives of characterize decametre flow units using the seismic data as constraints, as discussed in the Seismic Scale section, we considered, as a starting point for our analysis, the number of four FU, which corresponds to the lower order of slope variation in Fig. 3 black lines . We found the same high and low frequency variations in the depth versus accumulated normalized FZI plot, as suggested by Da Rocha et al. 2019 . We choose the RQI FZI method for rock typing into flow units for the study area because of the large number of core permeability and porosity measurements. Due to the high geological heterogeneity of the Mero reservoir, a conventional analysis of RQI FZI produces a large number of FUs, as evidenced by the small-scale variation in Fig. 3. Given the scale differences between the core and well log data and the seismic data, we prefer to discretize the RQI FZI rock typing using percentiles values and a cumulative S-curve of core permeability porosity data, and then analyze the slope variation of this plot. The steps to construct the RQI FZI curve are 1. Calculate porosity and permeability percentiles of the core dataset 2. Calculate RQI and FZI values using Eq. 1 , Eq. 2 and the percen tiles values 3. Order the data with increasing values of log FZI 4. Accumulate and normalize the percentiles of permeability values 7 R. Penna and W. Moreira Lupinacci Marine and Petroleum Geology 124 2021 104829 Fig. 9. Section E-W showing occurrence probability for 4 dam flow units and the most probable FU. 5. Calculate the slope of the curve for each sample. when integrating data with scale differences. For comparison, Fig. 4 also exemplify porosity versus permeability regressions using the lithology description facies distinguishable at seismic scale. These facies car bonates, microporous and igneous rocks are based on the rock texture and have no correlation to the FU classification by no means, as dis cussed in Penna and Lupinacci 2020 . Note that, for our dataset, reasonable permoporous correlations per lithology are difficult. This relates to the fact that the lithological description neglects diagenetic effects that occur differently in later stages of the geology history of the reservoir. However, those effects are indirectly estimated using flow units. From the effective porosity and permeability of the nuclear magnetic resonance NMR logs, we calculated the RQI FZI values using Eq. 1 and Eq. 2 for the wells drilled in the area. We consider the Schlumberger-Doll Research permeability estimation Al-Ajmi and Holditch, 2000 , that uses the log mean of relaxation time T2 of NMR logging small relaxation time corresponds to small pores, while large relaxation time reflects the larger pores . Fig. 5 shows the flow units rock typing applied for the wells 1, 3 and 7. In these wells, it is evidenced that most carbonates with recrystallized silica were classified as FU1, low porosity-permeability values. This is quite notable at the bottom of the Itapema Formation in Well 1, where the silicon content raises to about 25 and the FU1 is predominant. Igneous rocks were also characterized as FU1. Low-energy carbonates with fine sediments, as mudstones, were classified mostly as FU2, as seen in segments where gamma ray values increase. Carbonates with better permoporous conditions were classified as FU3 or FU4, depending on the silicon content and porosity perme ability values. As we observed in the SMLP, two ranges are observable in the de rivative data one on a small scale higher order , related to metric variations, and other on a large scale lower order , related to decametre variations Penna and Lupinacci, 2020 . The four decametre FU detected in the SMLP graph are expressed in the RQI FZI calculation as the major jumps in the derivative data, here named as FU1 to FU4. We can infer that the use of percentiles and cumulative data comprises a powerful tool to visualize higher order variations in the data. This is under standable, given that a running sum in the frequency domain works as a high-cut frequency operator. FU1 is considered a barrier or baffle zone and corresponds to the initial flat segment of the curve with near zero permeability. FU2 relates to the initial detachment of the curve, with reduced but considerable flow capacity in the decametre scale. FU3 relates to the first ramp up after the FU2 cut-off value and an increasing steep curve. This is a reservoir rock with greater permeability and good flow performance. Finally, FU4 corresponds to the better flow characteristics and relates to the final step of the S-curve. We used the log FZI values as cut-offs for the segmentation of each rock typing, shown in Table 1. We constructed a k versus semi-log plot and created regressions per flow units from core permeability and porosity Fig. 4 . It is evident that there is a scatter around each FU regression line, suggesting that a higher frequency classification is more adequate to this dataset. How ever, using the concept of decametre flow units, we expect to gain lateral predictability of the petrophysical properties, even that means losing vertical resolution. This is a constant trade-off that we must manage 8 R. Penna and W. Moreira Lupinacci Marine and Petroleum Geology 124 2021 104829 Fig. 10. PI versus porosity regressions for decametre flow units left and lithologies right . 4.1. Seismic 1D feasibility property volumes, we can rewrite Eq. 4 as p FU . p PI, SI FZI , p FU PI, SI p PI, SI To verify how the discretization of decametre flow units behaves in the elastic space, considering the vertical resolution of the Mero seismic dataset, we performed a 1D feasibility study using time-filtered versions of well logs for the frequency content of the elastic parameter volumes 0 60 Hz , that is, with minimum inversion thickness of 23 m. For discrete well logs, like the flow units, we considered the upscaled facies as the one that occurs with the greatest frequency given a running analysis window. Fig. 6 shows how each flow unit separates in the filtered elastic domain, considering the P- and S-impedances values within each deca metre FZI. As seen also in well logs in Fig. 5, FU1 tends to present higher values of impedances, while FU4 corresponds to lower values. This is expected, considering that FU1 and FU2 are mostly comprised of low porosity and silicon cemented carbonates, while FU3 and FU4 corre spond to higher porosity and calcium-pure carbonates. Due to the reduced number of FU used in the study, we can note some super imposed zones between each of the four FUs in the elastic domain. This mean that a single pair of P-impedance and S-impedance values can relate different flow units, resulting in some level of classification errors when predicting petrophysical parameters within FUs. Similar analysis from the elastic characteristics of the lithological facies from Mero reservoir can be seen in Penna et al. 2019 . We performed a Bayesian classification to provide a quantitative analysis of the probability occurrence from each flow unit, given the high-cut filtered version of the well logs as inputs. Bayesian s theorem describes the posterior probability p m z of the parameters model m given the observed data z p m . p z m p m z , 4 p z 5 where p FU is a priori estimation of occurrence probability for each facies. For that, we used a relative FU facies count for each well. The term p PI, SI FU corresponds to the probability density function adjusted for each FU in the P-impedance PI versus S-impedance SI crossplot as seen in the histograms in Fig. 6 , and p PI, SI is a normalization factor joint probability of PI and SI . Fig. 7 shows the resulting classification, considering all the time-filtered inputs. Note that because of the seismic vertical resolution, several thin layers are not identified in the Bayesian classification. However, the results are consistent and the main units are well ranked on the scale of impedance volumes. 4.2. Prestack seismic inversion We performed the calculation of P-impedance PI and S-impedance SI volumes through a sparse-spike prestack seismic inversion Pendrel, 2001 using seven partial angle stacks derived from the RTM data Penna et al., 2019 . We analyzed the AVO response of the reservoirs of the Mero Field to generate the angle stacks, considering four degrees of overlap between each stack. The angle ranges are 6-14 , 10-18 , 14-22 , 18-26 , 22-30 and 24-32 . Individuals wavelets were calculated from each angle stack using a combination of zero phase long-window wavelets and well-constrained short-window wavelets. We constructed a low frequency model up to 4 Hz using four seismic interpreted horizons base of salt top of the Barra Velha Formation , top of the Itapema Formation, base of the Itapema Formation top of the Pic arras Formation , and the Basement top. The PI and SI well logs were interpolated using an ordinary kriging technique Azevedo and Soares, 2017 . We did not considered any uncertainty analysis of the low-frequency influence on the final PI, SI and density volumes, because we assume that the amount of wells drilled in the area is enough to obtain an accurate low-frequency model. We discussed some of the where p m and p z are the probabilities of observing m and z inde pendently, respectively, and p z m is the conditional probability the z given m. Given the 3D discretization of FU using seismic derived elastic 9 R. Penna and W. Moreira Lupinacci Marine and Petroleum Geology 124 2021 104829 Fig. 11. top Comparison between porosities obtained from regressions by FU blue curve and by lithology red curve with NMR porosity black curve in well 1 and 16. bottom NMR porosity x-axis and porosities using regressions by FU and by lithology y-axis considering all wells. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. quantitative results obtain with accuracy using the elastic seismic at tributes in Penna et al. 2019 . As previously discussed, working with elastic inversion volumes provides an advantage over amplitude seismic due to the increase of vertical resolution brought by low and high fre quency content. Low frequencies are artificially incorporated using the well logs, while high frequencies result by the seismic amplitude deconvolution process. Fig. 8 exemplify one NW-SE section resulting from prestack inversion in Mero reservoir. In general, the results show a good correlation be tween the original well logs and inversion impedance values, which confirm the robustness of the seismic inversion results. Most of the Pimpedance errors are concentrated in the high values of the intrusive rocks. This is due to these rocks are mostly found near the base of salt, where occurs a lot of tuning effects and high impedance contrasts be tween the salt and carbonate layers. Even with the vertical resolution increase with the seismic inversion, it is hard to correctly reproduce the real thickness and impedance values in these conditions. The dispersion around the S-impedance estimation is commonly higher than the Pimpedance for Brazilian presalt data, explained due to the worse signal noise ratio in the far angle stacks, compared to the near angle stacks Penna et al., 2019 . 4.3. Seismic quantitative interpretation for decametre flow units We applied Eq. 5 to obtain occurrence probability of decametre flow units in the 3D grid using the P-impedance and S-impedance vol umes. For this, we calculated distinct probability density functions pdfs for the Barra Velha and Itapema formations, considering the impedance logs, as shown in Fig. 6. The priori probabilities volumes for each FU were built using a relative proportion of FU per well that were 10 R. Penna and W. Moreira Lupinacci Marine and Petroleum Geology 124 2021 104829 Fig. 12. Comparison between the porosities from FU and from lithology. Sections of FU-porosity A and C and lithology-porosity B and D . Average porosity maps of the tops of the top Barra Velha and bottom Itapema Formations. extrapolated to the grid through ordinary kriging, considering the interpreted seismic horizons as stratigraphic control. The outputs of the Bayesian inference were five volumes one discrete, called most probable FU and four different occurrence proba bility volumes for each decametre flow unit. The most probable volume consists of the corresponding discrete data with the higher occurrence probability for a given sample. Each occurrence probability volume varies from zero to one, and the sum of all the probabilities for a given sample is always one. Fig. 9 exemplifies an E-W section with the five calculated Bayesian probabilities. The thick FU4 response in the upper-middle part of the Itapema Fm. corresponds to a large bivalve rudstone coquina bank, deposited during the late stage of the rift phase. This lithofacies is one of the best reservoirs of the Mero Field in terms of permoporosity, and a detailed study about the textural and taphonomic characteristics of this type of reservoirs is found in Chinelatto et al. 2020 . Most of the Barra Velha Fm. presents FU3, which also has good conditions. At the upper part of the Barra Velha Fm. has continuous layers of FU1 and FU2, especially near the western flexural edge. This is related to an increased silica concentration, as seen in the top of well 1 and well 3 in Fig. 5. The predominance of FU1 is notable in the eastern part of the section, but, in this case, it is due to the presence of intrusive igneous rocks, probably related to the fault plane presents in that part. Microporous sediments mostly clay-enriched carbonate also appear as a continuous FU1 layer near the base of the Itapema Fm. Toward the generation of seismic derived petrophysical parameters considering the decametre flow units concept as constraints, we created empirical PI versus regressions for each FU. The link between porosity and P-impedance is one of the most important rock physics relation for seismic quantitative interpretation. Several rock physics models use this link to characterize and predict the permoporous reservoir behavior Avseth et al., 2005, Ferreira and Lupinacci, 2018 Pec anha et al., 2019, Lupinacci et al., 2020 . Fig. 10 shows the PI versus relations for each FU stablished using the P-impedance and the NMR effective porosity of well logs. We also presented a comparison of the FU-porosity versus the lithology-porosity in this case, using regressions for reservoir and non-reservoir carbonates, igneous and microporous sediments . It is important to mention that due to the bulk compressibility characteristics of the reservoir relatively high values of bulk and shear modulus , the discretization of carbonates using the lithology description is quite incipient. For instance, a separation between rudstones and shrubs or even water-saturated carbonates between oil-saturated carbonate are not possible through elastic attributes. We can observe that the PI versus dispersions around each litho logical facies are higher than the dispersions around each FU Fig. 10 . In general, constraining the seismic porosity estimation using flow units provides results that are more accurate, as seen in the well logs, percent errors and crossplots in Fig. 11. The usage of lithological facies to constrain the seismic estimation of porosity overestimate low-porosity values and underestimate high-porosity values. The relations established in the well logs between FU-porosity and lithology-porosity Fig. 10 were extrapolated in the 3D grid on the decametric scale using, respectively, the most likely models of FU and lithologies obtained by the Bayesian classification. For more details of 3D modelling for lithologies using the Bayesian classification in the study area see in Penna et al. 2019 . Fig. 12 shows a comparison in two 11 R. Penna and W. Moreira Lupinacci Marine and Petroleum Geology 124 2021 104829 Fig. 13. a Comparison between permeabilities obtained from regressions by FU-porosity blue curve and by lithology-porosity red curve . b SDR permeability x-axis and permeabilities using regressions by FU-porosity and by lithology-porosity y-axis . For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. sections of the porosities obtained from FU and from lithology. The re sults using FU were more accurate and with a higher resolution in estimating porosity for thin layers. From our approach, we can identify layers with an intermediate range of porosity that were not previously invisible considering the lithological restriction. As shown in Fig. 11, the porosity from FU shows higher values, above 0.20, mainly at the top of the Itapema Fm., where the bivalve rudstones coquina are predomi nant. The observation is also valid for lower porosity values, below 0.05, more noticeable in the upper part of the Barra Velha Fm., due to the presence of intrusive igneous rocks and the silica recrystallization in carbonates. Extending the petrophysical properties, we calculated permeabilities based on the decametre flow unit concept permeability-porosity re gressions using equations shown in Fig. 4 , and compared them with the permeabilities estimated from the lithologies permeability-porosity regressions per lithology . For this, we considered the NMR effective porosity as inputs and the Schlumberger-Doll Research permeability as a benchmark Fig. 13 . The usage of decametre flow units as constraints 12 R. Penna and W. Moreira Lupinacci Marine and Petroleum Geology 124 2021 104829 Fig. 14. Comparison between the permeabilities from FU-permeability and from lithology-permeability. Sections of FU-permeability A and C and lithologypermeability. B and D . Average permeability maps of the tops of the top Barra Velha and bottom Itapema formations. provides a much better permeability estimation in Mero reservoir. The crossplots of the permeability measured and estimated in Fig. 13 demonstrate that percent errors using FU are generally between zero and 3 , while using the lithology the percent error is spread above 10 . The resulting permeabilities from the FU and lithology constraints are shown in sections and maps in Fig. 14. It is evident that the use of the decametre FU provides a better estimation of the permeability volume, in terms of the layer definition and the permoporous conditions. The same analyzes performed with porosity apply to the results of perme ability, although the differences are more evidenced between the permeability volumes per FU and per lithology. To validate our three-dimensional results, we compared the porosity and permeability values extracted in well locations from the sections discussed in Figs. Figs. 12 and 14. We called these extracted values as pseudologs, and the comparison between estimated and profiled and k are displayed in Fig. 15. We can see, apart from the scale differences seismic inversion derived results are a smoothed version of the well logs , that the results are quite consistent, capturing the main variations of porosity and permeability. This is what we expect for the decametric characterization of the reservoir to evidence variations of a lower order in terms of fluid movements. However, some differences between the estimated and profiled values are notable, most of them related to seismic noise or signal degradation in those places. For example, near the depth 5650 m in Well 11 Fig. 15 , it is possible to notice that the porosity and permeability derived from the seismic inversion are over estimated when compared to the well logs. In that location, the seismic signal is degraded in the Barra Velha section due to the presence of a seismic migration artifact, which is repeat near the top of the Itapema Formation, also generating errors near the depth 5760 m. P- and Simpedance estimates are affected when the seismic signal is compro mised, and, consequently, porosity and permeability estimates are also affected. Small errors and miscalculation are also present, and we relate this to the dispersion of the P-impedance versus porosity fit in the decametric FU template, as shown in Fig. 10. In almost the whole sec tion, the FZI calculated permeability and porosity is more accurate than the lithology calculated ones. Analyzing the porosity and permeability calculated on the deca metric scale, we note that the response of the flow units in terms of pore generation obliteration processes comprises a sum of all factors that occur at smaller metric scale. Although some indication of fracture permeability and transmissibility are seen in EWT and dynamic data, at seismic-decametric scale, we do not believe that high permeability corridors or layers will be detectable or successfully classified using our technique. Fig. 16 shows that the FU1 and FU2, with worse permoporous conditions, are related to intrusive igneous rocks as well as both silici fication and dolomitization processes silica and dolomite replacing calcite , represented as higher concentrations of calcium, magnesium and silicon, while FU3 and FU4 present dominance of clean calcite carbonates, with little diagenetic effects. These results are same as those found by Vasquez et al. 2019 in their petroacoustics studies in Bra zilian presalt carbonates. Although the understanding and identification of each individual diagenetic process is important, as it can show different porosity and permeability relations at metric scale Grude et al., 2015 , they will have the same meaning in terms of flow simu lation at decametre scale. Depending on how each individual effect overlaps, the results on decametric scale may be a single flow barrier zone in the reservoir, for example, or a high permeability layer. Usually, most flow simulators grids have decametre cells-size, so they fit for this purpose. 5. Conclusions The use of decametric flow units as a constraint to estimate petro physical properties at seismic inversion scale produces much better re sults than using the lithology classification. In our approach, we noticed that the calculated porosity difference is smaller due to the strong 13 R. Penna and W. Moreira Lupinacci Marine and Petroleum Geology 124 2021 104829 Fig. 15. Pseudologs extracted at three well locations from the 3D volumes of porosity and permeability compared with the porosity and permeability well logs. impedance-porosity relation independent of the scale. For the perme ability estimation, the usage of decametric flow units proved to be crucial to achieve good results due to the indirect consideration of diagenetic effects. We consider that the accurate mapping and comprehension of the flow behavior at decametric scale is the first step to build the dynamic knowledge of the reservoir at smaller scales, especially considering all the concerns and difficulties to incorporate FU into geologic models built essentially on analogs, sedimentary facies and conceptual premises. Our methodology provides ways to generate a minimum amount of FU that calculates porosity and permeability with acceptable accuracy and are correlatable with elastic attributes on seismic inversion scale. We believe that petrophysical estimations derived from decametre flow units by our approach will have great impact on the static model building, as well as 4D seismic interpretation and seismic assisted history matching. The proposed method shows that the use of seismic elastic inversion laterally predicting decametric flow 14 R. Penna and W. Moreira Lupinacci Marine and Petroleum Geology 124 2021 104829 Fig. 16. Ternary diagram of calcium Ca , magnesium Mg and silicon Si by FU in Well 1. In the decametric scale, degrees of pore obliteration due to dolomi tization and silicification Si and Mg substituting Ca are mixed. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. units and producing reliable petrophysical parameters is possible. However, due to the elastic characteristics of the Mero reservoir, the evident loss of vertical resolution, the need to simplify the analysis reducing the number of FU, and the presence of high superimposed zones of each FU in the elastic domain, we strongly suggest an uncer tainty analysis and different decametric flow unit occurrence scenarios using the a posteriori probability volumes later during the static model building stage. We also suggest considering the interpretation of the second most probable FU in the Bayesian calculation as a different occurrence scenario. Areas with similar values of FU occurrence prob ability should have a closer look. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Acknowledgments The authors thank the Petrobras Libra JPT project and partners Shell, Total, CNOOC and CNPC for the data availability. We kindly appreciate all the anonymus reviewers for dedicating time to improve this manuscript. Also Petrobras s Camilla Almeida, Marcos Sebastia o, Vitor Mello, Andre Luis Souza, Rodolfo Victor, Antonio Carlos Nasci mento, Leonardo Teixeira, Alexandre Maul and Shell s Louis Sturgess and Wences Gouveia for the technical support and discussions. A special appretiation for the Universidade Federal Fluminense for providing structure and means to make science again. Credit author statement Rodrigo Penna Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Valida tion, Investigation, Writing original draft, Writing review editing, Visualization Wagner Lupinacci Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Resources, Writing review editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition. 15 R. Penna and W. Moreira Lupinacci Marine and Petroleum Geology 124 2021 104829 Appendix A. Supplementary data the Persian gulf. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 170, 400 408. https doi.org 10.1016 j. petrol.2018.06.086. Herlinger, R., Zambonato, E.E., Ros, L.F., 2017. Influence of diagenesis on the quality of lower cretaceous pre-salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs from northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. J. Sediment. Res. 87, 1285 1313. https doi.org 10.2110 jsr.2017.70. Hill, S., 2005. Inversion-based thickness determination. Lead. Edge 24 5 , 449 560. https doi.org 10.1190 1.1926799. Iravani, M., Rastegarnia, M., Javani, D., Sanati, A., Hajiabadi, S.H., 2018. Application of seismic attribute technique to estimate the 3D model of hydraulic flow units a case study of a Gas field in Iran. Egypt. J. Petrol. 27 2 , 145 157. https doi.org 10.1016 j.ejpe.2017.02.003. Jesus, I.L., Lupinacci, W.M., Gamboa, L.A.P., Freire, A.F.M., 2019. Electrofacies identification and evaluation in a well of the pre-salt of the Mero field, Santos Basin. In 16th International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society, Expanded Abstract. Kallweit, R., Wood, L., 1982. The limits of resolution of zero-phase wavelets. Geophysics 47 7 , 1035 1046. Kozeny, J., 1927. Ueber kapillare Leitung des Wassers im Boden. Sitzungsber Akad 136 2a , 271 306. Li, P., Zheng, M., Bi, H., Wu, S., Wang, X., 2018. Pore Throat Structure and Fractal Characteristics of Tight Oil Sandstones A Case Study in the Ordos Basin, China. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 149, 665 674. https doi.org 10.1016 j.petrol.2016.11.015. Lupinacci, W., Gomes, L., Ferreira, D., Bijani, R., Freire, F., 2020. An integrated approach for carbonate reservoir characterization a case study from the Linguado Field, Campos Basin. Braz. J. Geol. 50 4 , 1 12. https doi.org 10.1590 23174889202020190103. Oliveira, S., Lupinacci, W., 2013. L1 norm inversion method for deconvolution in attenuating media. Geophys. Prospect. 61, 771 777. https doi.org 10.1111 13652478.12002. Pec anha, A., Lupinacci, W., Ferreira, D., Freire, A., 2019. A workflow for reservoir characterization applied to presalt coquinas from the linguado field, Campos Basin, Brazil. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 183, 106451. https doi.org 10.1016 j. petrol.2019.106451. Penna, R., Araujo, S., Geisslinger, A., Sansonowski, R., Oliveira, L., Rosseto, J., Matos, M., 2019. Carbonate and igneous rock characterization through reprocessing, FWI imaging and elastic inversion of a legacy seismic data set in Brazilian pre-salt province. Lead. Edge 38 1 , 11 19. https doi.org 10.1190 tle38010011.1. Penna, R., Lupinacci, W., 2020. Decametre scale flow units classification in Brazilian presalt carbonates. SPE Reservoir Eval. Eng. 23 4 . SPE-201235-PA. Pendrel, J., 2001. Seismic inversion the best tool for reservoir characterization. CSEG Recorder 26 1 , 1 20. Prasad, M., 2003. Velocity-permeability relations within hydraulic units. Geophysics 68 1 , 108 117. https doi.org 10.1190 1.1543198. Rastegarnia, M., Sanati, A., Javani, D., 2016. A comparative study of 3D FZI and electrofacies modeling using seismic attribute analysis and neural network technique a case study of cheshmeh-khosh oil field in Iran. Petroleum 2, 225 235. https doi.org 10.1016 j.petlm.2016.06.005. Seifert, I., Penna, R., Maul, A., Fari as, M., 2017. Accurate Velocity Model Refinement through the use of Acoustic Impedance for Evaporite Seismic Facies differentiation of Pre-Salt Reservoir Prospects in Santos Basin. Presented at the 15th Int. Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society 1. https doi.org 10.1190 sbgf2017-351. Svirsky, D., Pankov, M., Ryazanov, A., Corbett, P., 2004. Hydraulic flow units resolve reservoir description challenges in a siberian oil field. In SPE Asia Pacific Conference on Integrated Modelling for Asset Management, Expanded Abstract. SPE 87056. Testerman, J.D., 1962. A statistical reservoir-zonation technique. J. Petrol. Technol. 14 8 , 889 893. https doi.org 10.2118 286-PA. Vasquez, G., Morschbacher, M., Wense, C., Parisek, Y., Madrucci, V., Justen, J., 2019. Petroacoustics and composition of presalt rocks from Santos Basin. Lead. Edge 38 5 , 322 416. https doi.org 10.1190 tle38050342.1. Veeken, P., Da Silva, M., 2004. Seismic inversion methods and some of their constraints. First Break 22, 15 38. https doi.org 10.3997 1365-2397.2004011. Vernik, L., 2016. Seismic Petrophysics in Quantitative Interpretation. Society of Exploration Geophysics, Houston. Wang, Y., 2014. Seismic Inversion Theory and Applications, first ed. Wiley-Blackwell. Wheeler, H., 1958. Time-stratigraphy. AAPG Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull. 42 5 , 1047 1063. https doi.org 10.1306 0bda5af2-16bd-11d7-8645000102c1865d. Supplementary data related to this article can be found at https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2020.104829. References Al-Ajmi, F., Holditch, S., 2000. Permeability estimation using hydraulic flow units in a central arabia reservoir. In SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition, Expanded Abstracts. SPE-63254-MS. https doi.org 10.2118 63254-MS. Amaefule, J.O., Altunbay, M., 1993. Enhanced reservoir description using core and log data to identify hydraulic flow units and predict permeability in uncored intervals wells. In SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition, Expanded Abstracts. SPE-26436-MS. https doi.org 10.2118 26436-MS. Aggoun, R.C., Tiab, D., Owayed, J.F., 2006. Characterization of flow units in shaly sand reservoirs hassi R mel oil rim, Algeria. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 50, 211 226. https doi. org 10.1016 j.petrol.2005.10.006. Aster, R.C., Borchers, B., Thurber, C., 2004. Parameter Estimation and Inverse Problems, first ed. Elsevier Academic Press. Avseth, P., Mukerji, T., Mavko, G., 2005. Quantitative Seismic Interpretation Applying Rock Physics Tools to Reduce Interpretation Risk, first ed. Cambridge Press, Cambridge. Azevedo, L., Soares, A., 2017. Geostatistical Methods for Reservoir Geophysics, first ed. Springer, New York. Carlotto, M.A., Silva, R.C.B., Yamato, A., Trindade, W., Moreira, J., Fernandes, R., Ribeiro, O., 2017. Libra a newborn giant in the Brazilian pre-salt province. In Merrill, R.K., Sternbach, E. Eds. , Giant Fields of the Decade 2000 2010, vol. 113. AAPG Memoir, pp. 165 176. https doi.org 10.1306 13572006M1133685, 2017. Carman, P., 1937. Fluid flow through granular beds. Transactions 15, 150 166. Chinelatto, G., Belila, A., Basso, M., Souza, J.P., Vidal, A., 2020. A Taphofacies Interpretation of Shell Concentrations and Their Relationship with Petrophysics A Case Study of Barremian-Aptian Coquinas in the Itapema Formation, Santos BasinBrazil. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 116 https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2020.104317, 104317. Da Rocha, H., Costa, J., Carrasquilla, A., Carrasco, A., 2019. Petrophysical characterization using well log resistivity and rock grain specific surface area in a fractured carbonate pre-salt reservoir in the Santos Basin, Brazil. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 183 2019 , 106372. https doi.org 10.1016 j.petrol.2019.106372. Daraei, M., Bayet-Goll, A., Ansari, M., 2017. An integrated reservoir zonation in sequence stratigraphic framework a case from the dezful embayment, zagros, Iran. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 154, 389 404. https doi.org 10.1016 j.petrol.2017.04.038. Dvorkin, J., Gutierrez, M., Grana, D., 2016. Seismic Reflections of Rock Properties, first ed. Cambridge Press, Cambridge. Emami Niri, M., Lumley, D.E., 2016. Probabilistic reservoir property modelling jointly constrained by 3D seismic data and hydraulic unit analysis. SPE Reservoir Eval. Eng. 19 2 , 253 264. https doi.org 10.2118 171444-PA. Ferreira, D., Lupinacci, W., 2018. An approach for three-dimensional quantitative carbonate reservoir characterization in the pampo field, Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. AAPG Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull. 102 11 , 2267 2282. https doi.org 10.1306 04121817352. Ghanbarian, B., Lake, L., Sahimi, M., 2019. Insights into rock typing a critical study. SPE J. 24 1 , 230 242. https doi.org 10.2118 191366-PA. Grude, S., Landro, M., Dvorkin, M., 2015. Permeability variation with porosity, pore space geometry and cement type a case history from the snohvit field, the barents sea. Geophysics 80 1 , D43 D49. https doi.org 10.1190 geo2014-0064.1. Gomes, J.P., Bunevich, R., Tedeschi, L., Tucker, M., Whitaker, F., 2020. Facies classification and patterns of lacustrine carbonate deposition of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazilian pre-salt. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 113, 1 21. https doi. org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2019.104176. Gunter, G.W., Finneran, J.M., Hartman, D.J., Miller, J.D., 1997. In Early Determination of Reservoir Flow Units Using an Integrated Petrophysical Method. 1997 SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition, SPE, Expanded Abstract, SPE 38679. https doi.org 10.2118 38679-MS. Hatampour, A., Schaffie, M., Jafari, S., 2018. Hydraulic flow units estimation from seismic data using artificial intelligence systems, an example from a Gas reservoir in 16

[END_OF_PAPER]

High-resolution stratigraphy and characterization of reservoir-critical heterogeneities in the giant Tupi Field, pre-salt Santos Basin, Brazil Saulo Pedrinha and Victor de Mello Artaga o Petrobras S.A., Reservoir Team, Centro Empresarial Senado, Av. Henrique Valadares, 28, Centro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, CEP 20231-030, Brazil SP, 0000-0003-3325-2020 Correspondence saulo.pedrinha petrobras.com.br Abstract The large oil discoveries that have occurred in recent decades in the pre-salt section of the South Atlantic sedimentary basins have promoted a significant volume of scientific research regarding the origin of these deposits. Most of the current studies of this stratigraphic interval focus on regional aspects or sedimentological and diagenetic processes. However, few studies encompass the geological characteristics of the pre-salt deposits from a reservoir-scale perspective. This work addresses the construction of a detailed reservoir-oriented stratigraphic framework for the giant Tupi Field. Discovered in 2006 following a successful exploratory campaign in the southeastern Brazilian deep-water, the Tupi Field s main reservoirs are sag-phase carbonates from the Aptian-aged Barra Velha Formation. These rocks accumulated in alkaline to highly alkaline lacustrine settings, which allowed the development of unusual syngenetic elements, such as magnesian clays, calcitic spherulites and calcitic shrubs. The reservoirs depositional organization was essentially conditioned by climatic oscillations and tectonic activity, which controlled sedimentation rates and accommodation styles through space and time. The high-resolution stratigraphic framework established in this article supports a detailed understanding, at different scales, of the Tupi Field s sedimentological evolution and its main vertical and lateral facies distribution. These aspects have, in turn, provided essential inputs for reservoir characterization and constrained critical heterogeneities of the 3D geocellular model, even in reservoirs affected by diagenetic processes. Scientific and technological advances in the early 2000s regarding seismic data quality, geological knowledge and the capability to drill in deeper waters allowed exploration of the Aptian lacustrine carbonate reservoirs underlying the thick over 2000 m evaporites offshore of southeastern Brazil. In this context, the successful Santos Basin pre-salt play exploratory campaign discovered the giant Tupi accumulation in 2006. The economic importance of this world-class discovery can be understood by its estimated recoverable volumes, between 5 and 8 billion barrels of oil equivalent, which would be c. 50 of the total hydrocarbon reserves of Brazil at that time. In recent decades, there have been several other discoveries in the pre-salt play in the Brazilian Santos and Campos basins as well as in the western African basins. Driven by the economic significance of these discoveries, progress has been made in understanding the geological aspects at the exploration scale. However, few studies have discussed the geological characteristics of pre-salt reservoirs at an adequate scale to guide oil production. In this sense, high-resolution stratigraphic analysis at an oilfield scale is fundamental to understanding the reservoirs main depositional controls and how these rocks are three-dimensionally distributed, which ultimately allows for a better understanding of how petrophysical property variations affect the reservoir s fluid dynamics and, thus, supports a more robust development, production and management plan. This work aims to address the reservoir aspects of the Barra Velha Formation deposits in the Tupi Field at an oilfield scale in order to construct a highresolution stratigraphic framework. This framework will support a detailed understanding of the depositional evolution of the studied area and provide essential inputs for the characterization and geocellular 3D modelling of the reservoirs, including their critical heterogeneities. Geological setting The Santos Basin, located in the SE region of the Brazilian continental margin Fig. 1 , encompasses c. 350 000 km2. It is separated in the north from the Campos Basin by the Cabo Frio High and from the Pelotas Basin in the south by the Floriano polis Platform. The evolution of the basin is related to the processes associated with the rupture of Western Gondwana and the opening of the South Atlantic. From Garland, J., Barnett, A. J., Burchette, T. P. and Wright, V. P. eds Carbonate Reservoirs Applying Current Knowledge to Future Energy Needs. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 548, https doi.org 10.1144 SP548-2023-91 2024 The Author s . Published by The Geological Society of London. All rights reserved. For permissions http www.geolsoc.org.uk permissions. Publishing disclaimer www.geolsoc.org.uk pub ethics S. Pedrinha and V. M. Artaga o Fig. 1. a, b Santos Basin location map. c Top structural map for the Tupi Field reservoir Barra Velha Formation , including drilled wells. d Seismic section showing the main stratigraphic units in the Tupi Field. These processes began in the Early Cretaceous and consist of three distinct tectonic phases in the Santos Basin the rift, post-rift and drift phases Moreira et al. 2007 Fig. 2 . The lower part of the Guaratiba Group Valanginian to early Aptian composes the Santos Basin rift phase. It is composed of volcanic rocks Camboriu Formation , siliciclastic sediments Pic arras Formation and bioclastic carbonates Itapema Formation deposited in a lacustrine setting, related to a period of intense tectonism when extensional fault activity controlled accommodation Fig. 1d . The post-rift phase encompasses the upper portion of the Guaratiba Group early to late Aptian , composed of chemical and biogenic lacustrine carbonate rocks Barra Velha Formation and a thick salt layer Ariri Formation related to a restricted marine environment both were deposited during a period of reduced fault activity and the beginning of a dominantly thermal subsidence regime. The Camburi Albian to Cenomanian , Frade Turonian to Maastrichtian and Itamambuca Danian to Recent groups compose the drift phase sediments, including siliciclastic and carbonate rocks deposited in a marine setting. Pre-Cambrian metamorphic and igneous rocks of the Ribeira Belt Moreira et al. 2007 form the basin s crystalline basement. The giant Tupi Field high-resolution stratigraphy Fig. 2. Simplified stratigraphic chart of the Santos Basin. Barra Velha Formation lacustrine carbonates comprise the main reservoirs of the Tupi Field. R Main reservoir interval in the Tupi Field. Source modified from Moreira et al. 2007 . The Tupi Field is located on a structural high known as the Santos Basin External High, with drilling depths ranging from 4600 to 6000 m in ultradeep waters 2500 m its most important reservoirs make up the post-rift, sag-phase Barra Velha Formation. These reservoirs fill the inherited relief from the rift phase and display a relatively gradual thickening basinwards, suggesting minor fault activity during their sedimentation Fig. 1d . Barra Velha Formation depositional controls and dynamics Recent studies characterized the pre-salt section of the eastern Brazilian and western African basins and have allowed for a better understanding of these exotic and unique deposits Terra et al. 2010 Dorobek et al. 2012 Wright and Barnett 2015 Herlinger 2016 Saller et al. 2016 Ceraldi and Green 2017 Lima and De Ros 2019 Gomes et al. 2020 . Some authors interpret a significant marine influence during the Barra Velha Formation sedimentation, especially because it is immediately underlying a thick evaporite section characteristic of a protooceanic environment Cainelli and Mohriak 1999 Moreira et al. 2007 Carminatti et al. 2008 . Nevertheless, the geochemical analysis carried out by Pietzsch et al. 2018 and supported by radiogenic strontium data indicates that the deposition of the carbonates in the Barra Velha Formation is associated with a lacustrine environment. Wright and S. Pedrinha and V. M. Artaga o Barnett 2015 also suggested that these deposits have a dominantly lacustrine origin. This interpretation, according to the authors, is based on an extensive analysis of cores and thin-sections, where they found 1 scarce fossiliferous content, with the presence of non-marine ostracods and phosphatic fragments 2 the absence of marine fossils, including those typical of a restricted marine environment, such as miliolid foraminifera 3 an abundant presence of magnesian clay minerals, common in alkaline lakes under the influence of volcanic terrains and 4 the absence of sulfates, such as anhydrite or gypsum, that would be expected in a restricted environment under a marine influence. Other works, such as those by Saller et al. 2016 , Herlinger 2016 and Ceraldi and Green 2017 analysed the rocks of the sag section of the Kwanza and Campos basins, which are chronologically correlated with the deposits of the Barra Velha Formation. The lithotypes identified there are very similar to those described by Wright and Barnett 2015 , which also supports the interpretation of these deposits as having been dominantly accumulated in a lacustrine setting. The rock samples studied in the present work have similar characteristics to those cited by the authors mentioned above, which supports a lacustrine interpretation for the Barra Velha Formation deposits. Therefore, lake dynamics had a strong influence on the deposition of these rocks. Compared to marine environments, lakes are systems with lower volumes of water and, consequently, are much more sensitive to climate Bohacs et al. 2000 . Wet and dry periods directly influence a lake s level, sedimentation rate and the available space for sediment accumulation i.e. accommodation Fig. 3 . When the precipitation rates exceed the evaporation rates in wet periods, the volume of water brought in by rivers increases, which is directly proportional to the external influx of sediments the water volume that raises the lake level is responsible for an increase in accommodation and the expansion of its margins. When evaporation rates exceed precipitation rates in dry periods, external sediment input decreases as rivers become less vigorous or even dry. During these periods, the lake tends to retract, exposing previously subaqueous areas, and its water depth tends to decrease, restricting accommodation. Owing to the decrease in the lake s water volume, dry periods promote an increase in alkalinity and salinity and develop chemical and biogenic carbonate facies. Facies analysis The Tupi Field currently has more than 100 drilled wells Fig. 1 , making it the largest reservoir Fig. 3. Main lacustrine sedimentation variables and controls over a full climatic cycle. There is a direct link between external sedimentary supply, rainfall, water alkalinity carbonate production and evaporation. Extra-basinal interference on groundwater fluctuation e.g. eustasy is not considered in this diagram. Source modified from Bento Freire 2012 and Pedrinha 2014 . The giant Tupi Field high-resolution stratigraphy database for the Brazilian pre-salt section. The analysis of the Barra Velha Formation was supported by interpretations from 770 m of cores, c. 4400 sidewall samples, a complete set of logs, petrophysical and seismic data, as well as over 15 years of dynamic information. This detailed investigation has enhanced the comprehension of the main depositional processes and factors influencing the distribution of facies in this specific interval of the field. Main facies components The Barra Velha Formation rocks were deposited in a stressed lacustrine setting during the South Atlantic Ocean opening and are commonly composed of calcitic shrubs Chafetz and Folk 1984 , calcitic spherulites, magnesian clay minerals and intraclasts generated by the physical reworking of these elements. Other observed components are transitional types between calcitic spherulites and calcitic shrubs, microcrystalline calcite, ostracod bioclasts and various detrital siliciclastic constituents with different compositions and grain sizes. and show vertical to subvertical growth, varying in size from 1 to 20 mm. They sometimes have wellmarked internal laminations Fig. 4 . Calcitic spherulites Calcitic spherulites have spherical to sub-spherical forms and usually a well-preserved fibro-radial texture. They range in size from 0.1 to 2 mm, commonly having a micritic nucleus or, more rarely, a bioclastic nucleus. These components primarily occur by displacing and deforming magnesian clay aggregates, suggesting that calcitic spherulites grow after clay deposition and are thus of diagenetic origin Fig. 5 . Transitional types between calcitic spherulites and calcitic shrubs Transitional types, including asymmetric spherulites and incipient shrubs that grow from spherulitic forms, also occur in the Barra Velha Formation Fig. 6 . These elements are commonly laterally amalgamated and coalesced, forming crustiform textures. Calcitic shrubs Magnesian clay minerals The term shrub describes an external calcitic morphology, similar to the branching of woody plants, without any genetic consideration Chafetz and Folk 1984 . The observed shrubs are formed by fascicular-optical calcite aggregates Kendall 1977 Magnesian clays occur mainly as massive or laminated aggregates, often dolomitized, silicified or dissolved, and are predominantly associated with calcitic spherulites, which displace and deform their laminations. These aggregates occur commonly Fig. 4. a Shrubs formed by fascicular calcite aggregates showing vertical growth porosity in blue and local presence of dolomites between the elements yellow arrow XPL, cross-polarized light . b Same as a PL, plane polarized light . c Shrubs with internal lamination PL . d Shrub details fibrous crystals of radially extinct calcite XPL . S. Pedrinha and V. M. Artaga o Fig. 5. a Calcitic spherulites displacing magnesian clay aggregates locally replaced by dolomite rhombohedra yellow arrow XPL, cross-polarized light . b Same as a PL, plane polarized light . c Dolomitized laminated magnesian clay aggregate displaced by spherulites micritic element in the spherulite nucleus in the upper right portion of the image yellow arrow XPL . d Spherulites displacing magnesian clay aggregate with associated detrital siliciclastic constituents yellow arrow XPL . Fig. 6. a Asymmetric spherulites yellow arrow XPL, cross-polarized light . b Transitional components between spherulites and shrubs XPL . c Incipient laterally amalgamated shrubs between porosity-rich levels yellow arrow , coalesced spherulites red arrow and remnants of dolomitized clay material green arrow XPL . d Detail of c XPL . The giant Tupi Field high-resolution stratigraphy associated with detrital siliciclastic components Fig. 5 . Facies components discussion The observed calcitic shrubs in this study are like those classified by Chafetz and Guidry 1999 as ray crystal shrubs and interpreted as being a product of abiotic processes. The authors associate these elements with high rates of CO2 loss and high saturation environments, providing very high rates of calcium carbonate precipitation. Moreira et al. 2007 interpreted these constituents as being a product of biological activity and related calcitic shrubs to microbial stromatolite deposition. The occurrence of calcitic spherulites is observed in several recent carbonate environments Buczynski and Chafetz 1993 Verrecchia et al. 1995 Spadafora et al. 2010 Bahniuk et al. 2015 . However, their origin has been widely debated over recent years. Dupraz et al. 2009 emphasized the role of organic matrices in calcium carbonate mineralization, controlling the crystals morphology and their mineralogy. According to the authors, biological processes influence the calcitic spherulite genesis, where metabolic activity of bacteria creates a favourable environment for precipitation. The results from Tutulo and Tosca s 2018 studies also provided a robust constraint on the geochemistry of Mg-silicate carbonate interactions during alkaline lake sedimentation, leaving open the potential for biological contributions to sedimentation within the pre-salt basins. Mercedes-Marti n et al. 2016 , through experimental analysis, have demonstrated that in saline and alkaline solutions containing organic acids, which are common in microbial mats, calcitic spherulites can precipitate. However, the observed particle size c. 0.02 mm is significantly smaller than similar components observed in our study. Mercedes-Marti n et al. 2016 also observed that supersaturated solutions do not precipitate spherulitic calcium carbonate forms. The growth of spherulites is favoured by a higher concentration of magnesium and silica in very alkaline solutions, associated with increased rates of calcite crystallization, with or without microbial influence and, especially, in a viscous media Garcia-Ruiz 2000 Sanchez-Navas et al. 2009 Beck and Andreassen 2010 Meister et al. 2011 Wright and Barnett 2015 . Wright and Barnett 2015 proposed an abiotic precipitation mechanism for the calcitic spherulites observed in the Barra Velha Formation. Hydrated gels rich in silica and magnesium, as mentioned by Tosca and Masterson 2014 as possible precursors of magnesian clay aggregates, would be an ideal realm for the nucleation and growth of these components. The transition types between calcitic spherulites and calcitic shrubs indicates a continuous process for generating these components. Saller et al. 2016 reported the occurrence of hybrid components between spherulites and shrubs in the Aptian section of the Kwanza Basin, which is very similar to those observed in our study. Saller et al. 2016 interpreted the spherulites as developing inside muddy sediments in low-energy environments, while the shrubs precipitate in higher energy and supersaturated environments. The hybrid forms are associated with transitional environments between these two physicochemical conditions. Several authors report syngenetic magnesian clay minerals in alkaline and saline lacustrine environments Millot 1970 Darragi and Tardy 1987 Calvo et al. 1999 . Clay minerals can occur in the form of stevensite, sepiolite, palygorskite, saponite, kerolite and talc Darragi and Tardy 1987 Carramal et al. 2022 , depending on the chemical conditions of the lake water. Herlinger s 2016 analysis of the Macabu Formation deposits Campos Basin , which are chronologically equivalent to the Barra Velha Formation, suggests a predominantly stevensitic composition for the observed clays. Tosca and Masterson 2014 observed that the occurrence of a gel, and not a crystalline-structured clay mineral, is associated with the initial stages of stevensite precipitation. Such evidence is relevant to understanding this gel s potential to nucleate minerals and, therefore, to interpreting magnesian clay distribution in lacustrine deposits. These gels are unlikely to stay preserved in high-energy environments under the influence of waves, currents or regions susceptible to subaerial exposure Tosca and Wright 2018 . Sedimentary facies Six facies associations were recognized in the Tupi Field reservoirs based on their depositional environment energy, depth and chemistry of lake water laminated mudstones LM , spherulitic claystones SC , in situ carbonates with well-developed shrublike texture InSitu-shrubs , incipient shrub-like and or crust-like in situ carbonates InSitu-incip , reworked carbonates RC and reworked carbonates with detrital siliciclastic content RC-si . Laminated mudstones Laminated mudstones LM are characterized on a macroscopic scale by a millimetric alternation of light-coloured layers and brownish to greenish layers. The light-coloured layers are silt to clay in grain size and carbonate calcitic and dolomitic in composition. In contrast, the brownish to greenish layers are organic-rich and associated with silt to clay detrital siliciclastic constituents. The observed S. Pedrinha and V. M. Artaga o laminations are crenulated or flat, the former being much more common. One of the most singular aspects of these facies is the common presence of silica occurring in centimetric to decimetric layers Fig. 7 . At a microscopic scale, carbonate layers may exhibit an irregular and discontinuous appearance and are commonly recrystallized. Silt-sized detrital siliciclastic constituents typically occur. Locally concentrated levels of phosphatic bioclast fragments and dispersed ostracods compose the fossiliferous content Fig. 8 . Clay intervals have different proportions of silt and very fine sand composed of quartz, micas, feldspars and opaque and greenish minerals. When the proportion of detrital siliciclastic material is high, these layers become greenish, and magnesian clays generally occur. Spherulitic claystones Spherulitic claystones SC are characterized on a macroscopic scale by magnesian clay aggregates that commonly occur associated with calcitic spherulites. A brownish to greenish colour is the most frequent, with a large variation in the proportion of spherulites to clay matrix, forming a wackestone-like texture when spherulite levels are concentrated, causing amalgamation. The proportion of spherulites typically increases towards the top of the layers, resulting in a laminated appearance to the rock due to the alternating proportions Fig. 9 . It is possible to see that the spherulites displace and deform the magnesian clay aggregates at a microscopic scale. The clays are often dolomitized and commonly associated with detrital siliciclastic mud content Fig. 5 . The characteristics observed in the spherulitic claystones are similar to those reported in the study on magnesium silicates in the Tupi Field conducted by Carramal et al. 2022 . In situ carbonates with well-developed shrub-like texture The InSitu-shrubs facies association is defined by the presence of vertical to subvertical growth of welldeveloped shrub-like elements .2 mm , which, eventually, exhibit a primary texture modified by a subaerial exposure process resulting in dissolved and brecciated intervals Fig. 10 . Levels of different sizes of shrubs give a laminated aspect at the Fig. 7. a c Laminated calcitic and dolomitic mudstones LM facies appearance. Greenish colours are associated with detrital siliciclastic constituents. d Laminae silica levels dark grey . The giant Tupi Field high-resolution stratigraphy Fig. 8. a Slightly uneven laminations, fine granulometry and presence of dispersed detrital siliciclastic constituents yellow arrow PL, plane polarized light . b Silt to fine sand levels of detrital siliciclastic concentration yellow arrow PL . c Dispersed ostracods yellow arrow . d Laminated mudstones PL . macroscopic scale. At the microscopic scale, the occurrence of well-preserved magnesian clays or dolomite between the shrubs is rare. Reworked material composed of intraclasts and or peloids and pores is commonly observed between the shrubs. associations within the studied interval those with less than 10 siliciclastic content are classified as RC facies, while those with greater than 10 siliciclastic content are classified as reworked carbonates with siliciclastic content RC-si facies. In situ carbonates with incipient shrub-like and or crust-like texture Sedimentary facies discussion The predominance of incipient calcitic shrub elements ,2 mm , often containing spherulites that can amalgamate and form crust-rich horizons Fig. 11 , characterizes the in situ carbonates with incipient shrub-like and or crust-like texture InSitu-incip facies. This facies usually occurs in a transition from SC to InSitu-shrubs Fig. 6 . Reworked carbonates and reworked carbonates with siliciclastic content The reworked carbonates RC facies are predominantly composed of fragments of calcitic spherulites and or calcitic shrubs with grain sizes varying from fine sand to pebble but more commonly made up of coarse to very coarse sand. Peloids, ostracod bioclasts, magnesian clays and detrital siliciclastic constituents igneous rock clasts also occur Figs 12 13 . The RC facies often exhibit moderate sorting and massive textures. They present planar, tabular, tangential or low-angle cross-stratification structures. The detrital siliciclastic content of the reworked carbonates is used to define two subtypes of facies The genesis of laminated mudstones is related to low-energy environments, where the main depositional process involved is settling from suspension. Secondly, irregular laminations of carbonate levels may indicate possible microbial activity. In this sense, the crenulated laminations may indicate more significant microbial activity than the flat ones Demicco and Hardie 1994 . The observed silica layers associated with the laminated mudstones are related to syngenetic precipitation and indicate dilution of the lake waters. The input of meteoric water during wet periods causes a decrease in the pH, promoting the precipitation of the previously dissolved silica associated with periods of higher water concentration and alkalinity Wright and Barnett 2015 . Spherulitic claystones are associated with lowenergy lake waters with high alkalinity and a large silica and magnesium content that allowed the magnesian clay minerals to precipitate and accumulate with or without the influence of microbial substrates Tosca and Masterson 2014 . In turn, these sediments served as an ideal medium for spherulite nucleation since the occurrence of magnesian clays without the presence of these constituents is rare. S. Pedrinha and V. M. Artaga o Fig. 9. a, b Bottom to the top trend of an increasing proportion of spherulitic and incipient shrubs constituents. The laminated aspect is present due to the intercalation of levels with different proportions of spherulites. c Slightly greenish colour of the matrix indicates the presence of detrital siliciclastic mud. The commonly observed upward trend of an increase in the proportion of spherulites indicates a progressive evolution of the lake water s physicochemical characteristics. The occurrence of fine-grained detrital siliciclastic material associated with the clay aggregates and spherulites suggests that, even during wet periods when the external sediment input to the water body is higher, the lake chemistry has remained prone to the precipitation of these constituents. Abiotic precipitation in a moderate-to-highenergy subaquatic environment represents the main deposition process for the InSitu-shrubs facies. The observed shrub elements, similar to ray crystal shrubs Chafetz and Guidry 1999 , indicate rapid precipitation, probably induced by very high pH values and high rates of CO2 degassing. Therefore, this suggests deposition during dry periods, when the high evaporation rates induce a progressive increase in the salinity and alkalinity of the lake water, and in relatively higher energy environments, where the agitation of the water promotes CO2 degassing and carbonate precipitation. The absence of fossils, possibly due to the extreme salinity and alkalinity conditions, the lower proportions of associated magnesian clays or detrital siliciclastic material, and the often-observed subaerial exposure features like brecciation and dissolution, also support The giant Tupi Field high-resolution stratigraphy Fig. 10. a c Well-developed in situ shrub-like textures. Notice the slightly domal geometry in b . d Primary texture of InSitu-shrubs facies strongly modified by dissolution processes related to subaerial exposure. the proposed sedimentological interpretation for these facies. The InSitu-incip facies are formed in an intermediate physicochemical environment to those necessary for forming SC and InSitu-shrubs. The occurrence of less-developed calcitic elements can also be interpreted as a function of the space available for precipitation i.e. accommodation , which may be significantly reduced depending on the lake s physiography and its related water depth. In terms of processes, the presence of small shrubs that form millimetric crusts and are commonly associated with spherulite-rich levels indicates carbonate precipitation that starts inside the muddy sediments spherulites and that progressively moves above the sediment water surface shrubs . The presence of cross-stratification structures and fragments of calcitic spherulites, calcitic shrubs and detrital siliciclastic constituents indicate that the main sedimentary processes related to the genesis S. Pedrinha and V. M. Artaga o Fig. 11. a, b Incipient calcitic shrubs amalgamate laterally and form crust horizons yellow arrow . Calcitic spherulitic constituents are also commonly observed in the InSitu-incip facies. of the RC and RC-si facies are interpreted as being a product of subaqueous tractive flow in a high-tomoderate-energy environment associated with the action of currents and waves. Palaeoenvironmental interpretation Lithofacies analysis supports a model for the occurrence of facies in the Tupi Field area that considers the relationships between parameters like water depth, energy levels and distance to the local lake margin Fig. 14 . However, lake-level fluctuations acted as a control on these parameters variability through space and time, giving origin to a complex lateral and vertical shift in facies and hiatuses in the geological record. LM and SC facies developed in a low-energy environment with relatively deeper water depths. Higher allogenic fine-grained detrital siliciclastic content and the presence of tabular silica levels, interpreted as syngenetic and associated with a decrease in the lake water pH, suggest that the LM facies can be correlated with a wet climate. Spherulitic claystones and their associated syngenetic magnesian clays and calcitic spherulites suggest a relatively higher pH alkaline and higher ion concentration in the lake water Tosca and Wright 2018 . However, the common presence of detrital siliciclastic constituents indicates deposition under a moderately wet climate with, consequently, an external input of sediments into the system. InSitu-shrubs developed under high-tomoderate-energy environments located in shallower water depths. Dry periods and CO2 degassing, related to water agitation, favoured the ideal chemical conditions that induced the precipitation of fascicular forms of calcium carbonate directly on the lake substrate. The intermediate physicochemical conditions between SC and InSitu-shrubs triggered the accumulation of InSitu-incip facies. Extremely reduced water depths, which prevented the more effective growth of the fascicular forms, can also explain incipient carbonate facies. The presence of sedimentary structures related to bedload transport and the composition of the RC and RC-si constituents indicate high-to-moderate-energy conditions associated with the action of waves and currents in shallow water depths. The trigger for the genesis of these deposits occurs during wet periods, when the water influx promoted the input of sediments into the system, especially near the lake margin, where particles generated by subaerial exposure were available. Sandy to conglomeratic detrital siliciclastic constituents, composed predominantly of igneous clasts, indicate the existence of emerged areas with volcanic deposits associated with intrabasinal structural highs inherited from rift tectonism. Thick and extensive deposits of reworked carbonates are observed in the Tupi Field, particularly in the structurally higher regions. This occurs because the shorelines of lakes are relatively narrower compared to marine environments due to limited wave action fetch that creates a shallow wave base. This effect is amplified in low-gradient lakes, where rapid fluctuations in lake levels prevent the establishment of a stable shoreline Barnett et al. 2018 . The preservation of the magnesian clays is mainly controlled by environmental depositional energy. As The giant Tupi Field high-resolution stratigraphy Fig. 12. a, b Macroscopic aspects of the reworked carbonates RC facies. Grain size varying from fine sand to pebble and moderate sorting in a . Low-angle cross-stratification in b . c, d Greenish-coloured igneous rock clasts yellow arrow associated with reworked carbonates with detrital siliciclastic content RC-si facies. already discussed, this constituent is primarily related to the spherulite-rich facies. However, preserved magnesian clays can be observed in all depositional facies. Therefore, it seems that the lake was prone to the chemical precipitation of these constituents independent of facies type during most of its development, although they occur much less commonly in moderate-to-high-energy depositional setting related facies. The exception is those periods where the lake water is more diluted and with relatively lower alkalinity, conditions that reduces the magnesian clay mineral precipitation propension. S. Pedrinha and V. M. Artaga o Fig. 13. a Coarse sand-to-granule-sized yellow arrow reworked carbonates RC facies XPL, cross-polarized light . b Moderately sorted RC facies. Grain size from medium to coarse sand yellow arrow PL, plane polarized light . c Igneous clasts associated with reworked carbonates with detrital siliciclastic content RC-si facies yellow arrow XPL . d Same as c PL . Fig. 14. Tupi Field facies associations and their relationships to water depth, environment energy and distance to the local lake margin. Post-rift lake palaeotopography was controlled by structural features inherited from the rift tectonic phase. The reworked facies were deposited in high-energy environments, and their associated detrital siliciclastic constituents tend to increase towards the local lake margin. High-to-moderate-energy conditions were prone to in situ sedimentation. Spherulitic claystones, laminated mudstones and preserved magnesian clay minerals are related to deeper water depths or local, relatively low-energy environments. Facies associations RC-si, reworked carbonates with siliciclastic content RC, reworked carbonates InSitu-shrubs, in situ carbonates with well-developed shrub-like texture InSitu-incip., in situ carbonates with incipient shrub-like and or crust-like texture SC, spherulitic claystones LM, laminated mudstones. The giant Tupi Field high-resolution stratigraphy High-resolution sequence stratigraphy Sequence stratigraphy has a fundamental criterion the analysis of changes in sedimentary facies stacking patterns caused by variations in accommodation and sediment supply rates over time. These changes give rise to stratigraphic surfaces that mark important modifications in the sedimentation regime, which are relevant for stratigraphic correlation and understanding the sedimentary evolution in a given area Catuneanu 2006 . Nowadays, a consensus is that a sequence the fundamental sequence stratigraphy unit can be limited by any two stratigraphic surfaces, both having the same genesis, thus bounding a complete sedimentary cycle. In this way, a succession of strata deposited during a full cycle of accommodation or sedimentary supply variation defines a sequence. Such definition is generic, independent of models and encompasses all types of sequences that can develop at any spatial or temporal scale Catuneanu et al. 2011 . More pragmatically, considering elements observed in the geological record, a sequence could also be conceived of as a succession of strata that presents a complete cycle of facies stacking pattern variation, being limited by stratigraphic surfaces Catuneanu and Zecchin 2013 . The concept of a sequence is particularly reinforced when its areal mappability can be demonstrated and the repeatability of its stacking patterns in the vertical section can be verified Fragoso et al. 2021 . The analysis of the facies stacking patterns observed in the Barra Velha Formation in the Tupi Field allows the recognition of sequences at different scales. The different sequence scales identified do not have, at first, any absolute temporal connotation embedded in their definitions, corresponding only to stacking pattern variations with different vertical extents. However, the changes in environmental conditions responsible for sequence discretization occurred at different scales of time and space. Elementary sequences A facies succession corresponding to the smallest recognizable cycle of environmental change characterizes an elementary sequence Strasser et al. 1999 . Based on the interpretation of the processes related to the main identified sedimentary facies and their stacking pattern analysis, three main elementary sequence types are defined Type 1, Type 2 and Type 3 elementary sequences Fig. 15 . The Type 1 elementary sequence is organized in the vertical, from base to top, as follows thick packages of reworked carbonates with siliciclastic content RC-si in situ carbonates with incipient shrub-like and or crust-like texture InSitu-incip and in situ carbonates with well-developed shrublike texture InSitu-shrubs . These sequences commonly present features of subaerial exposure at the top, and in terms of dimensions commonly have decimetric and rarely metric thicknesses. The observed vertical facies succession for the Type 2 elementary sequence is, from base to top, as follows packages of reworked carbonates RC laminated mudstones LM spherulitic claystones SC in situ carbonates with incipient shrub-like and or crust-like texture InSitu-incip and in situ carbonates with well-developed shrub-like texture InSitu-shrubs . Type 2 elementary sequences commonly present subaerial exposure features at the top and have a thickness of decimetric and rarely metric dimensions. The Type 3 elementary sequence presents a vertical facies arrangement, from base to top, as follows thin packages of reworked carbonates RC laminated mudstones LM spherulitic claystones SC and in situ carbonates with incipient shrub-like and or crust-like texture InSitu-incip . Subordinately, in situ carbonates with well-developed shrub-like texture InSitu-shrubs are observed punctuating the top of these sequences. A relevant characteristic of this sequence is the abundant presence of subaerial exposure features, with the development of dissolution and brecciation that especially affects the InSitu-incip and InSitu-shrubs facies. The observed thickness dimensions of the Type 3 elementary sequence are commonly decimetric and rarely metric. High-resolution sequence stratigraphy discussion The identified elementary sequence facies successions can be interpreted in terms of a complete lakelevel variation curve, representing the highest frequency cycle of environmental variation identified in the Tupi Field area Fig. 15 . Lacustrine sedimentary dynamics were the control mechanisms for forming the elementary sequences, and, consequently, it is possible to identify two sedimentation regimes in its geological record. Precipitation rates exceeding evaporation rates initiated the wet sedimentation regime that gradually increased accommodation and promoted the lake s areal expansion. The rainfall water influx, and its associated sediments, progressively reduced water alkalinity and salinity, decreasing carbonate precipitation rates. This regime was prone to the deposition of reworked constituents, which were transported into the lake by rainfall water, and low-energy facies due to the increased water depth. Evaporation rates exceeding precipitation rates established the dry sedimentation regime and promoted the lake s retraction. The progressive water volume reduction increased the lake alkalinity and salinity, favouring the precipitation of in situ facies since its components, especially S. Pedrinha and V. M. Artaga o Fig. 15. Elementary sequence representations for Barra Velha Formation deposits in the Tupi Field. Due to the short period involved in their deposition, subsidence is considered constant. the well-developed shrubs, have a predominantly chemical genesis. The lake-level fall linked to high evaporation and carbonate precipitation rates was responsible for the progressive reduction in accommodation and the lake s retraction in the dry sedimentation regime leading to the generation of subaerial exposure features. The presence of the RC-si facies and the absence of low-energy facies LM and SC facies during the wet sedimentation regime characterize the Type 1 elementary sequence. These aspects suggest high-to-moderate-energy conditions throughout the whole development of this sequence, even in high lake-level periods. It means that high-frequency The giant Tupi Field high-resolution stratigraphy lake-level variations could not significantly shift the lake margin, maintaining constant and elevated energy conditions over time at the basin s analysed position. The presence of igneous constituents implies the existence of exposed intrabasinal volcanic structural highs and, in addition to the small lateral variation of the water body margin, points to a lake with a complex palaeotopography with a relatively higher relief. The substantial development of InSitu-shrubs facies characterizes the Type 2 elementary sequence, indicating deposition in waters with relatively higher alkalinity and ionic concentration. The commonly observed presence of LM and SC facies in the wet sedimentation regime indicates a low-energy environment during the lake expansion periods. Highfrequency lake-level variations combined with a lower relief lake palaeotopography allowed significant lateral shifts of the lake margin, effectively changing from lower to higher energy conditions over short periods. The occurrence of low-energy facies, mostly laminated mudstones, associated with lake expansion periods and the common presence of subaerial exposure features, usually affecting the InSitu-shrubs or InSitu-incip facies during lake retraction, comprise the main aspects of the Type 3 elementary sequence. This alternation low-energy facies during expansion and extensive subaerial exposure features during retraction suggests another configuration in the lake s topographic condition. Very low-relief basin physiography allowed high-frequency lakelevel variations to significantly shift its margin, drastically changing the lake s areal extent and the regions on which sedimentary processes acted during wet and dry periods. The lower relative proportion of InSitu-shrubs facies may also indicate a more diluted water body, with lower alkalinity than the other sequences. From the sequence stratigraphy perspective, two essential surfaces can be identified within an elementary sequence and related to a lake-level variation curve. The maximum expansion surface MES marks the moment when the distance between the centre of the lake and its margin reaches its maximum. The MES also represents the moment when the sedimentation rate starts to exceed accommodation. From this point on, the facies stacking pattern changes, showing a shallowing upward pattern. This modification marks the beginning of lake retraction and a progressive water depth reduction, characterizing the retracting lake regime facies tract RLRT . The second stratigraphic surface identified is the maximum retraction surface MRS . This surface expresses the moment when the distance between the centre of the lake and its margin reaches its minimum. The MRS also records the moment when accommodation starts to exceed sedimentation rate. After this point, the facies stacking pattern changes, showing a deepening upward pattern that indicates the beginning of the lake expansion and the progressive increase in water depth, characterizing the expanding lake regime facies tract ELRT . The geological record encompasses numerous sequences, which have different origins and are related to a broad spectrum of temporal and spatial scales therefore, a hierarchization in terms of their nested patterns becomes fundamental. The sequence hierarchical method is independent of the time involved and the base level variation magnitude and its allogeneic controls Catuneanu 2006 . In this approach, the relative importance of the events that lead to sequence boundary development is primarily measured by analysing the facies stacking patterns that emerged from a balance between accommodation and sedimentation rates that, consequently, produced depositional trends. Following this logic, the small-scale sequences high frequency , usually having a thickness of a few metres, embrace a set of elementary sequences very high frequency , usually decimetric in scale Fig. 16 . Groups of small-scale sequences form the so-called medium-scale sequences medium-frequency , which are tens of metres thick. Finally, an ensemble of medium-scale sequences composes the large-scale sequences low frequency , with hundreds of metres in thickness Fig. 17 . The analysis of the facies proportion trends of the elementary sequences allows the identification of small-scale sequences. Sedimentary successions showing a predominance of elementary sequences of ELRTs indicate a trend of water body dilution induced by high rainfall rates, which caused a progressive expansion and lake-level rise during a smallscale sequence period. An inversion of this stacking pattern represented by an increase in the proportion of elementary sequences of RLRTs defines the small-scale sequence MES. From this point on, an increase in the lake water alkalinity associated with high evaporation rates resulted in a progressive retraction and lake-level fall in a small-scale sequence span. The small-scale sequence MRS records another inversion in this stacking pattern where the proportion of ELRTs starts to increase. This surface symbolizes the minimum accommodation within a small-scale sequence formation period. The largeand medium-scale sequences were defined using the same logic as the small-scale sequences, being identified by analysing the facies proportion trends associated with periods of lake expansion and retraction in the medium- and small-scale sequences. Reservoir zonation The analysis of sequence stacking patterns and the correlation of their most traceable and relevant S. Pedrinha and V. M. Artaga o Fig. 16. Set of elementary sequences that form a small-scale sequence. Notice the proportion of elementary lake regime facies tracts associated with the sedimentation regime of each small-scale sequence. GR, gamma-ray logs. Facies associations RC-si, reworked carbonates with siliciclastic content RC, reworked carbonates InSitu-shrubs, in situ carbonates with well-developed shrub-like texture InSitu-incip., in situ carbonates with incipient shrub-like and or crust-like texture SC, spherulitic claystones LM, laminated mudstones. stratigraphic surfaces across all drilled wells, strongly supported by seismic data, well logs and rock data, allowed for the construction of a high-resolution stratigraphic framework. The key medium-scale sequences identified were tracked and correlated within the reservoir, composing the stratigraphic zones of the Tupi Field. The established reservoir zonation provides the background to understand the reservoir s depositional evolution and three-dimensional facies variation, ultimately supporting the prediction of petrophysical properties and the spatial distribution of heterogeneity Magalha es et al. 2020 . Inherited structural features from the rift tectonic phase, along with some post-rift fault reactivation, influenced the lateral thickness variation within the stratigraphic framework. The older zones were deposited in a more complex lake palaeotopography related to faults , and over time the accommodation space was being filled, leading to a decrease in lake floor relief and gradually generating smaller thickness variations Fig. 18 . Depositional evolution The reservoir s depositional evolution reveals a gradual transformation in the lake palaeotopography associated with the span of a large-scale sequence Artaga o 2018 . The recognized low-frequency lake modifications reflect a balance between longterm changes in the tectonic activity and climate, factors that affected accommodation potential and sedimentation rates through time Fig. 19 . The sedimentary record in the Tupi Field is composed of three large-scale sequences, two of them being incomplete one at the base, showing only its retracting lake regime one at the top of the Barra Velha Formation, showing only the initial part of its expanding lake regime and one complete sequence. The lowermost incomplete sequence onlaps structurally higher areas and is only observed in wells located in regions where the Barra Velha Formation thickens in the basinward direction Fig. 18 . The complete large-scale sequence observed in the area occurs in all the wells and comprises most of the field s reservoir rocks. It initiates with a lowfrequency expanding lake regime t1, Fig. 19 . This interval is overlying a significant erosive angular unconformity in most parts of the area and marks the top of the Itapema Formation. The high proportion of medium-scale ELRTs and the occurrence of Type 1 elementary sequences characterize this first sedimentation regime. These observations suggest that important tectonic activity related to the rift phase of the basin affected the lake, developing a relatively deeper water depth and higher relief palaeotopography, which, associated with a wetter period, The giant Tupi Field high-resolution stratigraphy Fig. 17. Examples of medium- and large-scale sequences and spectral gamma-ray GR logs. Notice the change in facies proportions and their relationship to each sedimentological lake regime and the GR signatures. Expanding lake regimes exhibit higher GR values, mostly related to potassium and the detrital siliciclastic input. Retracting lake regimes and the associated carbonate facies show lower GR values. Facies associations RC-si, reworked carbonates with siliciclastic content RC, reworked carbonates InSitu-shrubs, in situ carbonates with well-developed shrub-like texture InSitu-incip., in situ carbonates with incipient shrub-like and or crust-like texture SC, spherulitic claystones LM, laminated mudstones. provided a significant influx of external sediments from emerged structural highs. Afterwards, a progressive increase in the proportion of medium-scale RLRTs and the occurrence of Type 2 elementary sequences mark the first low-frequency retracting lake regime t2, Fig. 19 . During this period, the continuous reduction in tectonic activity and the progressive increase in sedimentation rates of the InSitu-shrubs facies, related to a low-frequency dry period, gradually decreased the lake s relief and water depth. The occurrence of Type 3 elementary sequences and an increase in the proportion of medium-scale ELRTs characterizes the following second lowfrequency expanding lake regime t3, Fig. 19 . The substantial accommodation filling from the previous S. Pedrinha and V. M. Artaga o Fig. 18. Stratigraphic well-section across eight Tupi Field wells. Notice the gamma-ray GR log s high-frequency pattern and its signature associated with the reservoir stratigraphic zones and lake sedimentation regimes. Higher GR values are related to a large-scale maximum expansion surface, while lower values represent a large-scale maximum retraction surface. Higher clay mineral content is linked to a large-scale maximum expansion surface and structural lows in the field for the same stratigraphic interval. The giant Tupi Field high-resolution stratigraphy Fig. 19. The evolution of the Tupi Field reservoir depositional system can be interpreted in terms of a large-scale sequence reflecting long-term changes in lake palaeotopography driven by tectonism and climate. Facies associations RC-si, reworked carbonates with siliciclastic content RC, reworked carbonates InSitu-shrubs, in situ carbonates with well-developed shrub-like texture InSitu-incip., in situ carbonates with incipient shrub-like and or crust-like texture SC, spherulitic claystones LM, laminated mudstones. sedimentary regime resulted in a very low lake relief, with a drastic reduction in the space available for deposition during this period. The very shallow lake water depth very low relief associated with a wetter climatic condition promoted extensive cyclic exposure features and diminished the InSitu-shrubs facies sedimentation rate. The more diluted condition of the lake waters, highlighted by the lower proportion of InSitu-shrubs facies in addition to the transition to the Ariri Formation evaporites at the top of this interval, may indicate a marine influence during this period of the lake s evolution. Proportion curves were introduced at the end of the 1980s to assist in quantifying geological data for reservoir modelling and have proved to be a powerful tool for sequence stratigraphy analysis and for quantifying lithofacies Ravenne et al. 2002 . Moreover, concerning reservoir characterization, vertical proportion curves VPCs are one of the most important quantitative parameters affecting fluid flow S. Pedrinha and V. M. Artaga o within a reservoir Lopez et al. 2002 . VPCs are 100 stacked bar charts of lithofacies or any other categorical variable computed layer by layer parallel to a reference stratigraphic surface that is related to a depositional horizon in a given sequence. Computed from all available wells, Tupi Field VPCs exhibit a large-scale facies proportion trend that illustrates the low-frequency depositional evolution that the authors have interpreted Fig. 19 . The first low-frequency expanding lake regime t1, Fig. 19 culminates in a large-scale maximum expansion surface MESLS and higher values in the gamma-ray GR logs. These higher values reflect the high proportions of RC-si, SC, LM and magnesian-clay-rich sedimentary facies, which represents a pragmatic approach that groups nonreservoir facies with preserved Mg-clays independent of their type. The top of the low-frequency retracting lake regime t2, Fig. 19 marks a large-scale maximum retraction surface MRSLS , which is associated with a high proportion of InSitu-shrubs and InSitu-incip facies and with lower GR log values. Subsequently, another change in the vertical trend of facies occurs with the decrease in the proportion of InSitu-shrubs facies and an increase in the proportions of InSitu-incip and LM facies. These facies proportion variations impact the GR signature of this interval, which clearly shows an increase in its log values. The calculated vertical curves also demonstrate the correspondence between the reservoir stratigraphic zonation and the vertical sedimentary trends. The established reservoir zones correspond to the main medium-scale sequences identified and tracked within the Tupi Field and clearly show the logical trend of an increase in the proportion of InSitu-shrubs facies at the top of each sequence boundary. Reservoir modelling The construction of a three-dimensional geological reservoir model represents one of the most significant phases in the workflow of a petroleum field study, in terms of both the volume of work involved and the impact on the results. A reservoir s external and internal geometry and its related petrophysical heterogeneities, from small to large scale, are essential factors in determining a field s production performance Cosentino 2001 . The Tupi Field s three-dimensional reservoir modelling was performed by integrating the large amount of static data available, such as rock samples sidewall and cores , laboratory data, well logs and seismic data, with the dynamic information. The background geological concepts served as an input for the reservoir modelling workflow, as well as the flow simulation and history match, used as an a priori constraint in the 3D model construction. The high-resolution structural stratigraphic model was built combining the seismic interpretation and the established high-resolution stratigraphic framework, which supported by a sedimentological conceptual background constrains the 3D facies modelling. Since the defined facies have different characteristics regarding their petrophysical properties, the 3D facies model served as a constraint for the building of the 3D petrophysical model. The construction and calibration of the 3D petrophysical model of the field involved the use of seismic attributes, thousands of core analysis samples and a robust collection of more than 15 years of dynamic data. A rock-type spatial representation was defined for the Tupi Field reservoir using the 3D petrophysical model. The established 3D rock-type model encompasses classes of rocks deposited under similar conditions that experienced similar diagenetic processes, resulting in a unique porosity permeability relationship, capillary pressure profile and water saturation for a given height above free water level in the reservoir Archie 1950 . The entire set of constructed properties plays an important role as input for volumetrics and flow simulation studies and serves as a primary tool for development plans and active management of the reservoir Fig. 20 . VPCs demonstrate the impact of the reservoir zonation, supported by a high-resolution stratigraphic Fig. 20. Workflow for the 3D geological modelling of the Barra Velha Formation in the Tupi Field. The giant Tupi Field high-resolution stratigraphy Fig. 21. Tupi Field vertical proportion curves of facies associations, porosity classes, permeability classes and rock types computed from a 3D geological model and data from all wells bottom right . Facies associations RC-si, reworked carbonates with siliciclastic content RC, reworked carbonates InSitu-shrubs, in situ carbonates with well-developed shrub-like texture InSitu-incip., in situ carbonates with incipient shrub-like and or crust-like texture SC, spherulitic claystones LM, laminated mudstones. S. Pedrinha and V. M. Artaga o framework, in modelling the Tupi Field reservoir heterogeneities. Since the main stratigraphic surfaces used in the high-resolution structural stratigraphic 3D model were defined from a facies stacking pattern analysis, the global vertical proportion of facies represented within the 3D reservoir model reflects this same organization Figs 19 21 . For each individualized stratigraphic zone, the VPCs show an upward trend of increases in the in situ facies and a decrease in low-energy facies , which clearly imposes a strong control on the critical petrophysical properties expressed in the geological model. Quality control for the geological model workflow is provided by comparing the VPCs related to the facies associations and petrophysical properties calculated from all wells and those calculated from the 3D model output. The Tupi Field three-dimensional geological model maintains the same critical vertical heterogeneities observed in the wells Fig. 21 , confirming that a high-resolution stratigraphic framework and a seamless geological modelling workflow, where all the available static and dynamic data serve as an integrated input, provide a robust spatial representation of the reservoir s properties. The common and diverse diagenetic processes that affected the Brazilian pre-salt reservoirs had an important role in modifying their primary petrophysical properties Herlinger 2016 Lima and De Ros 2019 Gomes et al. 2020 . However, the Tupi Field reservoirs petrophysical properties are mostly controlled by the distribution of the original facies associations. In this sense, establishing a highresolution stratigraphic framework was crucial because, even in deposits strongly affected by diagenetic processes, the three-dimensional sedimentary facies architecture significantly constrains the critical petrophysical heterogeneities of the reservoir. Conclusions The Tupi Field s main reservoirs were deposited in a stressed lacustrine and alkaline environment, which allowed for the development of unusual facies comprising magnesian clay minerals, spherulitic and shrub-like calcitic constituents, and the laminated mudstones and reworked carbonates facies that can occur associated with igneous rock fragments. The interpretation of the processes involved in the genesis of the different facies associations and recognizing their limiting stratigraphic surfaces facilitated the construction of a depositional model that supports the identification of elementary sequences, which are products of the smallest recognizable environmental variation in the studied area. The same rationale used to define the small-scale sequences from variations in the facies proportion trends of the elementary sequences distinguishes the mediumscale and large-scale sequences, in this case from the investigation of facies proportions in small- and medium-scale sequences, respectively. The correlation of the most traceable and relevant stratigraphic surfaces across all drilled wells, supported by seismic data, well logs and rock data, allowed for the construction of a high-resolution stratigraphic framework and materialized the Tupi Field reservoir s zonation. Sequence and facies stacking pattern analysis at different scales sustained the identification of a reservoir depositional model that evolved over a large-scale sequence span. Longterm lake palaeotopographic variations related to the Santos Basin tectonic evolution in association with a broader climatic trend, had a strong influence on the sedimentological patterns and architecture of the Tupi Field reservoirs. The established high-resolution stratigraphic framework and reservoir zonation served as an input for a robust geological model workflow, integrating static and dynamic data. It provided a fundamental constraint for facies architecture prediction and its related petrophysical properties. For each Tupi Field stratigraphic zone, the vertical proportion of facies exhibits a pattern reflecting the same logical construction used to define sequences at different scales. Even for diagenetically affected rocks, it imposes the most important control on the reservoir s critical petrophysical heterogeneities. These advances in the reservoir characterization studies, driven by a highresolution stratigraphic analysis and the applied integrated geological modelling workflow, allowed for a robust understanding of the Tupi Field reservoirs critical heterogeneities, which has been fundamental to its successful development. High-resolution sequence stratigraphy is crucial and extremely valuable for the industry as it can offer insights and improve the comprehension of the permeability and porosity within a reservoir. The methodology outlined in this study is applicable and has the potential to provide valuable insights, reduce financial risks and improve the chances of success for projects in the oil and gas sector, as well as in emerging energies like geothermal sources or CCUS carbon capture, utilization and storage , where understanding reservoir characteristics is a fundamental requirement. Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge Petrobras Brazil for their support and permission to publish this article. We also express our gratitude to the Petrobras corporate training programme team focused on highresolution stratigraphy PCEAR , which promotes, develops and advises several studies related to this topic. We would also like to thank all the geoscientists and engineers who worked with us for several years on the Tupi Field s production development and contributed to a better understanding of its important and complex reservoirs. A special acknowledgment to the article reviewers for their valuable contributions and enriching discussions. The giant Tupi Field high-resolution stratigraphy Competing interests The authors declare the fol- lowing financial interests personal relationships, which may be considered as potential competing interests Saulo Pedrinha and Victor Artaga o are Petroleo Brasileiro S.A. employees. Author contributions SP conceptualization equal , data curation equal , investigation equal , methodology equal , writing original draft lead , writing review editing lead VDMA conceptualization equal , formal analysis equal , investigation equal , methodology equal , validation equal , writing original draft supporting , writing review editing supporting . Funding This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors. Data availability The data that support the findings of this study are available from Petroleo Brasileiro S.A. but restrictions apply to the availability of these data, which were used under licence for the current study, and so are not publicly available. Data are, however, available from the authors upon reasonable request and with permission of Petroleo Brasileiro S.A. References Archie, G.E. 1950. Introduction to petrophysics of reservoir rocks. AAPG Bulletin, 34, 943 961. Artaga o, V.M. 2018. Ana lise Estratigra fica de Alta Resoluc a o Aplicada aos Depo sitos da Formac a o Barra Velha, Bacia de Santos Identificac a o, Correlac a o e Mecanismos de Controle de Ciclos Sedimentares. MSc thesis, Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Bahniuk, A.M., Anjos, S. et al. 2015. Development of microbial carbonates in the Lower Cretaceous Codo Formation northeast Brazil implications for interpretation of microbialite facies associations and palaeoenvironmental conditions. Sedimentology, 62, 155 181, https doi.org 10.1111 sed.12144 Barnett, A.J., Obermaier, M., Amthor, J., Juk, K., Camara, R., Sharafodin, M. and Bolton, M. 2018. Origin and significance of thick carbonate grainstone packages in non-marine successions a case study from the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin. AAPG Search and Discovery Article 11116, adapted from poster presentation, AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition, 20 23 May 2018, Salt Lake City, Utah. Beck, R. and Andreassen, J.P. 2010. Spherulitic growth of calcium carbonate. Crystal Growth and Design, 10, 2934 2947, https doi.org 10.1021 cg901460g Bento Freire, E. 2012. Caracterizac a o Estratigra fica em Alta Resoluc a o das Seque ncias Calca rias de Origem Microbiana do Intervalo Paleoce nico da Formac a o Yacoraite Seque ncia Balbuena IV na Regia o de Salta Argentina. Masters Thesis, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro. Bohacs, K.M., Carroll, A.R. et al. 2000. Lake-basin type, source potential, and hydrocarbon character an integrated sequence-stratigraphic-geochemical framework. In Gierlowski-Kordesch, E. and Kelts, K. eds Lake Basins Through Space and Time. AAPG Studies in Geology, 46. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa, 3 37. Buczynski, C. and Chafetz, H.S. 1993. Habit of bacterially induced precipitates of calcium carbonate. In Rezak, R. and Lavoie, D.L. eds Carbonate Microfabrics. Springer, New York, 105 116. Cainelli, C. and Mohriak, W.U. 1999. Some remarks on the evolution of sedimentary basins along the Eastern Brazilian continental margin. Episodes, 22, 206 216, https doi.org 10.18814 epiiugs 1999 v22i3 008 Calvo, J.P., Blanc-Valleron, M.M. et al. 1999. Authigenic clay minerals in continental evaporitic environments. Special Publication of the International Association of Sedimentologists, 27, 129 151. Carminatti, M., Wolff, B. and Gamboa, L. 2008. New exploratory frontiers in Brazil. Paper WPC-19-2802 presented at the 19th World Petroleum Congress, 29 June 3 July 2008, Madrid, Spain. Carramal, N.G., Oliveira, D.N. et al. 2022. Paleoenvironmental insights from the deposition and diagenesis of Aptian pre-salt magnesium silicates from Lula Field, Santos Basin, Brazil. Journal of Sedimentary Research, 92, 12 31, https doi.org 10.2110 jsr.2020.139 Catuneanu, O. 2006. Principles of Sequence Stratigraphy, 1st edn. Elsevier, Amsterdam. Catuneanu, O. and Zecchin, M. 2013. High-resolution sequence stratigraphy of clastic shelves II controls on sequence development. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 39, 26 38, https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo. 2012.08.010 Catuneanu, O., Galloway, W.E. et al. 2011. Sequence stratigraphy methodology and nomenclature. Newsletters on Stratigraphy, 44, 173 245, https doi.org 10. 1127 0078-0421 2011 0011 Ceraldi, T.S. and Green, D. 2017. Evolution of the South Atlantic lacustrine deposits in response to Early Cretaceous rifting, subsidence and lake hydrology. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 438, 77 98, https doi.org 10.1144 SP438.10 Chafetz, H.S. and Folk, R.L. 1984. Travertines depositional morphology and the bacterially constructed constituents. Journal of Sedimentary Petrology, 54, 289 316. Chafetz, H.S. and Guidry, S.A. 1999. Bacterial shrubs, crystal shrubs, and ray-crystal shrubs bacterial v. abiotic precipitation. Sedimentary Geology, 126, 57 74, https doi.org 10.1016 S0037-0738 99 00032-9 Cosentino, L. 2001. Integrated Reservoir Studies. Editions Technip, Paris. Darragi, F. and Tardy, Y. 1987. Authigenic trioctahedral smectites controlling pH, alkalinity, silica and magnesium concentrations in alkaline lakes. Chemical Geology, 63, 59 72, https doi.org 10.1016 0009-2541 87 90074-X Demicco, R.V. and Hardie, L.A. 1994. Sedimentary structures and early diagenetic features of shallow marine carbonate deposits. Atlas 1, 1st edn, Tulsa, Society for Sedimentary Geology. S. Pedrinha and V. M. Artaga o Dorobek, S., Piccoli, L. et al. 2012. Carbonate rockforming processes in the pre-salt sag successions of Campos Basin, offshore Brazil evidence for seasonal, dominantly abiotic carbonate precipitation, substrate controls, and broader geologic implications. AAPG Hedberg Conference Microbial Carbonate Reservoir Characterization , 3 8 June 2012, Houston, Texas. Dupraz, C., Pamela Reid, R. et al. 2009. Processes of carbonate precipitation in modern microbial mats. EarthScience Reviews, 96, 141 162, https doi.org 10. 1016 j.earscirev.2008.10.005 Fragoso, D.G.C., Gabaglia, G.P.R., Magalha es, A.J.C. and Scherer, C.M.S. 2021. Cyclicity and hierarchy in sequence stratigraphy an integrated approach. Brazilian Journal of Geology, 51, https doi.org 10.1590 2317-4889202120200106 Garcia-Ruiz, J.M. 2000. Geochemical scenarios for the precipitation of biomimetic inorganic carbonates. SEPM Special Publications, 67, 75 89. Gomes, J.P., Bunevich, R.B. et al. 2020. Facies classification and patterns of lacustrine carbonate deposition of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazilian presalt. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 113, 104 176, https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2019.104176 Herlinger, R. 2016. Controles Deposicionais e Diagene ticos das Propriedades Petrofi sicas dos Reservato rios Aptianos Barremianos do Grupo Lagoa Feia no Norte da Bacia de Campos. Masters Thesis, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul. Kendall, A.C. 1977. Fascicular-optic calcite a replacement of bundled acicular carbonate cements. Journal of Sedimentary Petrology, 47, 1056 1062. Lima, B.E. and De Ros, L.F. 2019. Deposition, diagenetic and hydrothermal processes in the Aptian pre-salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs of the northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Sedimentary Geology, 383, 55 81, https doi.org 10.1016 j.sedgeo.2019.01.006 Lopez, S., Galli, A. and Cojan, I. 2002. Vertical proportion curves insights from fluvial process-based stochastic modeling. AAPG Annual Meeting, 10 13 March 2002, Houston, Texas. Magalha es, A.J.C., Gabaglia, G.P.R. et al. 2020. Highresolution sequence stratigraphy applied to reservoir zonation and characterization, and its impact on production performance shallow marine, fluvial downstream, and lacustrine carbonate setting. Earth-Science Reviews, 210, 10332, https doi.org 10.1016 j.earscirev.2020.103325 Meister, P., Johnson, O. et al. 2011. Magnesium inhibition controls spherical carbonate precipitation in ultrabasic springwater Cedars, California and culture experiments. In Reitner, J., Queric, N.-V. and Arp, G. eds Advances in Stromatolite Geobiology. Springer, Berlin, 101 121. Mercedes-Marti n, R., Rogerson, M.R. et al. 2016. Growing spherulitic calcite grains in saline, hyperalkaline lakes experimental evaluation of the effects of Mg-clays and organic acids. Sedimentary Geology, 335, 93 102, https doi.org 10.1016 j.sedgeo.2016.02.008 Millot, G. 1970. Geology of Clays. Springer, London. Moreira, J.L.P., Madeira, C.V., Gil, J.A. and Machado, M.A.P. et al. 2007. Bacia de Santos. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, Rio de Janeiro, 15, 531 549. Pedrinha, S. 2014. Ana lise Estratigra fica em Depo sitos Lacustres Maastrichtianos da Formac a o Yacoraite Bacia de Salta Argentina Definic a o e Rastreabilidade de Seque ncias de Alta Resoluc a o. Masters Thesis, Universidade Estadual Paulista, Rio Claro. Pietzsch, R., Oliveira, D.M., Tedeschi, L.R., Queiroz Neto, J.V., Figueiredo, M.F., Vazquez, J.C. and De Souza, R.S. 2018. Palaeohydrology of the Lower Cretaceous pre-salt lacustrine system, from rift to post-rift phase, Santos Basin, Brazil. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, 507, 60 80, https doi.org 10.1016 j.palaeo.2018.06.043 Ravenne, C., Galli, A., Doligez, B., Beucher, H. and Eschard, R. 2002. Quantification of facies relationships via proportion curves. In Armstrong, M., Bettini, C. et al. eds Geostatistics Rio 2000, Proceedings of the 31st International Geological Congress, Rio de Janeiro, 6 17 August 2000. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 19 39. Saller, A., Rushton, S. et al. 2016. Presalt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola. AAPG Bulletin, 100, 1135 1164, https doi. org 10.1306 02111615216 Sanchez-Navas, A., Marti n-Algarra, A. et al. 2009. Crystalgrowth behavior in Ca-Mg carbonate bacterial spherulites. Crystal Growth and Design, 9, 2690 2699, https doi.org 10.1021 cg801320p Spadafora, A., Perri, E. et al. 2010. Microbial biomineralization processes forming modern Ca Mg carbonate stromatolites. Sedimentology, 57, 27 40, https doi. org 10.1111 j.1365-3091.2009.01083.x Strasser, A., Pittet, B. et al. 1999. Depositional sequences in shallow carbonate-dominated sedimentary systems concepts for a high-resolution analysis. Sedimentary Geology, 128, 208 221. Terra, G.J.S., Spadini, A.R. et al. 2010. Classificac a o de rochas carbona ticas aplica veis a s bacias sedimentares brasileiras. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, Rio de Janeiro, 18, 9 29. Tosca, N.J. and Masterson, A.L. 2014. Chemical controls on incipient Mg-silicate crystallization at 25 C implications for early and late diagenesis. Clay Minerals, 49, 165 194, https doi.org 10.1180 claymin.2014. 049.2.03 Tosca, N.J. and Wright, V.P. 2018. Diagenetic pathways linked to labile Mg-clays in lacustrine carbonate reservoirs a model for the origin of secondary porosity in the Cretaceous pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, offshore Brazil. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 435, 33 46, https doi.org 10.1144 SP435.1 Tutulo, B.M. and Tosca, N.J. 2018. Experimental examination of the Mg-silicate-carbonate system at ambient temperature implications for alkaline chemical sedimentation and lacustrine carbonate formation. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 225, 80 101, https doi.org 10.1016 j.gca.2018.01.019 Verrecchia, E.P., Freytet, P. et al. 1995. Spherulites in calcrete laminar crusts biogenic CaCO3 precipitation as a major contributor to crust formation. Journal of Sedimentary Research, A65, 690 700. Wright, V.P. and Barnett, A.J. 2015. An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 418, 209 219, https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.3

[END_OF_PAPER]

Journal of Sedimentary Research, 2023, v. 93, 693 704 Research Article DOI 10.2110 jsr.2022.103 AN OPERATIONAL CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM FOR THE SOUTH ATLANTIC PRE-SALT ROCKS LUIZ FERNANDO DE ROS1 AND DANIEL M. OLIVEIRA2 1 Geosciences Institute, Rio Grande do Sul Federal University, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil 2 Petrobras Research Center, CENPES, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil email lfderos inf.ufrgs.br The giant Aptian reservoirs and associated lacustrine rocks of the South Atlantic pre-salt section present a series of unique characteristics, which make the systems created for marine carbonate rocks quite inadequate for their classification. Based on our experience with the characterization of thousands of samples of the pre-salt reservoirs and associated deposits from the Brazilian basins, and on a wide literature evaluation, we propose an objective and operational system for the classification of the unusual yet extremely important pre-salt lacustrine rocks. The system allows the coherent record of structure, fabric, primary texture and composition, and main diagenetic modifications of the in situ and resedimented rock types. The in situ rocks are directly classified according to the original proportion among calcite spherulites, fascicular shrubs, and mud matrix. The resedimented rocks are classified according to the original volume of . 2 mm particles and the proportion between sand and mud, using calcirudite, calcarenite, and calcilutite as unbiased names. Such an approach can also be applied to the classification of other particulate carbonate rocks, avoiding the conceptual problems and dubious interpretation of depositional environment and reservoir quality of currently used classification systems. The direct, objective, and intuitive proposed classification system shall contribute to the understanding, exploration, and production of the extraordinary South Atlantic pre-salt petroleum province. ABSTRACT CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PRE-SALT ROCKS During the last fifteen years, a series of giant hydrocarbon accumulations were discovered in very unusual Aptian reservoirs of the Santos, Campos, and Kwanza basins along the Brazilian and African South Atlantic margins e.g., Carminatti et al. 2008 Wright and Barnett 2015 Saller et al. 2016 Herlinger et al. 2017 Sabato Ceraldi and Green 2017 Abelha and Petersohn 2018 Lima and De Ros 2019 Gomes et al. 2020 Carvalho et al. 2022 Wright 2022 . These deposits were formed in a vast lacustrine system, which probably covered more than 1,000,000 km2 along the large sag depression generated by the early separation between Africa and South America Davison 2007 Chaboureau et al. 2013 Szatmari et al. 2021 Fig. 1 . The tectonic setting, which included extensive magmatism Szatmari and Milani 2016 , associated hydrothermal activity Teboul et al. 2017 Souza et al. 2018 Lima et al. 2020 , and also potentially mantle exhumation Szatmari and Milani 2016 Pinto et al. 2017 Wright 2022 , and the arid climatic conditions Pietzsch et al. 2020 Lawson et al. 2022 created an alkaline lacustrine environment with elevated activities of Mg, Ca, Si, Cl, and HCO3. Under these conditions, the in situ pre-salt deposits were generated by chemical precipitation in the water column, as well as at or just below the lake bottom, recorded by a combination of only three components magnesian clay matrix, calcite spherulites, and shrubs. The background of the lacustrine sedimentation, which represents the recurrent substrate for the precipitation of the other constituents in the depositional cycles, consists of authigenic, syngenetic magnesian phyllosilicates, represented mostly by stevensite a magnesian smectite , kerolite a hydrated form of talc , or interstratified mixed layers between the two Published Online October 2023 Copyright O 2023, SEPM Society for Sedimentary Geology Carramal et al. 2022 . These minerals precipitated by homogeneous nucleation as clay-size particles that accumulated as low-energy laminated deposits Fig. 2A or as silt- to fine sand-size peloids Fig. 2B . Some authors e.g., Tosca and Wright 2015 Wright and Barnett 2015, 2020 suggest that these magnesian clays may have originally been deposited as a Mg-Si gel, later crystallized. However, the voluminous and recurrent deposition of the Mg-clays would not be possible as a gel, considering the extremely slow settling of colloidal particles Stokes Law . Besides, the excellent parallel orientation of the laminated deposits Fig. 2C is incompatible with their crystallization from a gel, and their deformation by the very early precipitation of calcite spherulites and shrubs just below sediment water interface indicates their original, depositional parallel orientation. The precipitation of the calcite spherulites commonly occurred very close to the sediment water interface, as indicated by the common nucleation of shrubs on spherulites, and by the occurrence of transitional forms, such as asymmetric, vertically elongated spherulites. Mixed with the Mg-clays, there are subordinate amounts of detrital clays transformed mostly to interstratified illite smectite on burial and silt quartz, feldspars, and micas mostly , and rare ostracod and bacterial or algal bioclasts. The laminated Mg-clays were heterogeneously, often strongly, replaced by microcrystalline dolomite, silica, and dominantly calcite Fig. 2D , thus their misidentification as carbonate mud deposits in several published works Wright and Barnett 2015 Muniz and Bosence 2015 Sabato Ceraldi and Green 2017 Faria et al. 2017 Gomes et al. 2020 Wright and Barnett 2020 Wright 2022 . Actual micrite carbonate mud is absent from the pre-salt sag interval, for reasons to be determined. 1527-1404 23 093-693 Downloaded from http pubs.geoscienceworld.org sepm jsedres article-pdf 93 10 693 5989387 i1938-3681-93-10-693.pdf by COORDENACAO DE APERFEICOAMENTO DE PESSOAL DE NIVEL SUPERIOR CAPES user 694 L.F. DE ROS AND D.M. OLIVEIRA JSR FIG. 1. The extension of the Aptian South Atlantic pre-salt lacustrine system is probably equivalent to the extension of the overlying evaporites, covering most of the vast depression formed by the early separation between South America and Africa. Modified from Szatmari et al. 2021 . Calcite spherulites spheroidal radial-fibrous aggregates precipitated within the laminated Mg-clay deposits, replacing cutting and displacing deforming the laminae Herlinger et al. 2017 Lima and De Ros 2019 Carvalho et al. 2022 Fig. 2E . Additionally, the spherulites commonly nucleated on, and replaced, clay peloids Fig. 2F . Spherulites commonly vary in size from 0.15 to 2.5 mm and lack nuclei. The rare recognized nuclei include clay peloids, ostracod bioclasts, intraclasts, and lumps of microcrystalline calcite Herlinger et al. 2017 . The amount of calcite spherulites and their degree of coalescence are variable, as are their recrystallization, dolomitization, silicification, or dissolution Fig. 3A . The Mgclay matrix interstitial to the spherulites is commonly replaced by dolomite rhombs, microcrystalline calcite, or silica Fig. 3B , dehydrated, with the shrinkage pores filled by lamellar dolomite or magnesite Carramal et al. 2022 , and or dissolved Fig. 3B . Dissolution of the Mg-clay matrix interstitial to the spherulites has converted spherulitic rocks into reservoirs in many areas Fig. 3C Wright and Barnett 2020 Carramal et al. 2022 . In the Aptian pre-salt rocks, fascicular aggregates fascicular-optic, sensu Kendall 1977, i.e., feathery, or increasingly divergent fibrous pattern , also called shrubs Fig. 3D , are other important form of calcite precipitation, which occurred at the sediment water interface, but also within the substrate dominantly composed by laminated and peloidal Mg-clay deposits Herlinger et al. 2017 Lima and De Ros 2019 Carvalho et al. 2022 . The syngenetic precipitation of fascicular calcite formed crusts with growth framework sensu Choquette and Pray 1970 or interaggregate porosity, which constitute the main pre-salt reservoirs in many locations Fig. 3D . Transitional forms between fascicular shrubs and spherulites, such as asymmetrical and lobate spherulites and shrubs nucleated on spherulites, are quite common Fig. 3E , indicating that the two forms were precipitated from the same fluids, with intra-sediment, eodiagenetic formation of the spherulites, while the shrubs formed both within and on the sediments. The shrubs and their interstitial Mg-clays were exposed to the same diagenetic modifications observed in the spherulitic rocks Fig. 3F . Besides forming the in situ deposits, these constituents also occur as intraclasts in important and commonly extensive reworked deposits, which constitute the main pre-salt reservoirs in some areas, as in the Bu zios Field Ferreira et al. 2021a, 2021b . Such deposits are composed of reworked spherulites Fig. 4A , fragments of shrubs Fig. 4B , and subordinately microcrystalline carbonate, silica, and clay intraclasts, as well as clay superficial ooids made by thin Mg-clay envelopes covering such intraclasts Fig. 4C . The porosity of the intraclastic rocks is dominantly interparticle primary Fig. 4A , but also secondary, from the dissolution of clay matrix, intraclasts, and pseudomatrix Fig. 4D . Microbial carbonates with characteristic cryptocrystalline and clotted microfabrics are very rare in the Aptian pre-salt section, and should be classified according to their structures stromatolite, thrombolites, dendrolite, leiolite sensu Riding 2000 . WELL-KNOWN CARBONATE CLASSIFICATION SYSTEMS The most widely used carbonate classification system cf. Lokier and Al Junaibi 2016 is that initially proposed by Dunham 1962 , later complemented by Embry and Klovan 1971 and revisited by Wright 1992 . In this system, carbonate rocks are subdivided into three main categories. The first is represented by particulate, allochthonous or depositional types grainstone, packstone, wackestone, mudstone, rudstone, floatstone , composed of different proportions of allochem particles bioclasts, ooids, oncoids, peloids, pellets, and intraclasts and carbonate mud particulate depositional constituents , 20 mm, sensu Dunham 1962 , or , 30 mm, sensu Embry and Klovan 1971 . The second corresponds to constructed, autochthonous, or biological rocks framestone, bafflestone, and bindstone or boundstone , made by organisms like corals, which are originally bound together during deposition. The third corresponds to crystalline or diagenetic types, in which original constituents are either not recognizable owing to intense recrystallization or dolomitization sparite, or sparstone, dolostone , or strongly modified by compaction fitted or condensed limestone , or that are mainly made of precipitated cement cementstone . Downloaded from http pubs.geoscienceworld.org sepm jsedres article-pdf 93 10 693 5989387 i1938-3681-93-10-693.pdf by COORDENACAO DE APERFEICOAMENTO DE PESSOAL DE NIVEL SUPERIOR CAPES user JSR CLASSIFICATION OF PRE-SALT ROCKS 695 FIG. 2. Petrographic aspects characteristic of the fine-grained and spherulitic pre-salt rocks. A Fine-grained laminated deposit made of Mg-clays and minor detrital silt and clay, partially replaced by microcrystalline calcite. Uncrossed polarizers P . B Clay peloids and detrital silt partially replaced by microcrystalline calcite stained pink . Crossed polarizers XP . C Detail of the fabric of the laminated Mg-silicate matrix, showing the excellent parallel orientation of the clays, replaced by some microcrystalline dolomite and calcite. XP. D Replacement of the laminated Mg-clays by microcrystalline calcite stained pink and dolomite. XP. E Calcite spherulites stained pink replacing cutting and displacing deforming the Mg-clay laminations. XP. F Spherulites deforming the Mg-clay laminations with some detrital silt and including clay peloids arrows . XP. Downloaded from http pubs.geoscienceworld.org sepm jsedres article-pdf 93 10 693 5989387 i1938-3681-93-10-693.pdf by COORDENACAO DE APERFEICOAMENTO DE PESSOAL DE NIVEL SUPERIOR CAPES user 696 L.F. DE ROS AND D.M. OLIVEIRA JSR FIG. 3. Petrographic aspects characteristic of the spherulitic and fascicular pre-salt rocks. A Partially coalesced and recrystallized calcite spherulites stained pink replacing and displacing the Mg-silicate matrix. XP. B Dolomite rhombs partially replacing the Mg-clay matrix interstitial to the spherulites. XP. C Porous spherulitic rock with lamellar magnesite that filled shrinkage cracks in the laminated Mg-clay matrix, which was later dissolved. P. D Crust of fascicular calcite aggregates with growth-framework inter-aggregate porosity, partially reduced by silica cement. XP. E Transitional forms between fascicular shrubs and spherulites, such as asymmetrical and lobate spherulites, replacing Mg-silicate matrix. XP. F Fascicular calcite aggregates stained pink with interstitial Mg-clays replaced by zoned dolomite rhombs. XP. Downloaded from http pubs.geoscienceworld.org sepm jsedres article-pdf 93 10 693 5989387 i1938-3681-93-10-693.pdf by COORDENACAO DE APERFEICOAMENTO DE PESSOAL DE NIVEL SUPERIOR CAPES user JSR CLASSIFICATION OF PRE-SALT ROCKS 697 FIG. 4. Petrographic aspects characteristic of the resedimented pre-salt deposits. A Calcarenite essentially composed of spherulitic intraclasts. P. B Calcirudite made mostly of fascicular and microcrystalline intraclasts. P. C Level with clay ooids constituted by thin Mg-clay envelopes covering spherulitic and fascicular intraclasts. XP. D Intraclastic calcarenite of fascicular and spherulitic intraclasts stained pink with primary interparticle porosity, together with secondary intraparticle porosity. P. Another classification system commonly used for carbonate is that modified from Grabau 1904 and Bramkamp and Powers 1958 , which subdivides rocks into particulate types calcilutite, calcarenite, and calcirudite, according to the proportion and size of the allochems and of carbonate mud , bioconstructed biolithite , and strongly recrystallized or dolomitized types. Another well-known, although comparatively less used system is that of Folk 1959, 1962 , who created synthetic names, combining prefixes for the types of allochems, a middle name for the interstitial presence of calcite cement spar or micritic matrix, and a suffix for the size of the allochems e.g., biointramicrudite, for a rock made of large bioclasts and intraclasts and micritic matrix , and proposed biolithite for bioherm rocks. Bissel and Chilingar 1967 made an extensive review of the carbonate classifications up to that date. The Embry and Klovan 1971 system contains significant conceptual confusion, as the term rudstone is proposed for carbonate rocks containing more than 10 of allochems larger than 2 mm and being supported by them. As more than 30 of such . 2 mm particles would be needed to support the fabric of a particulate rock Folk 1968 , many rudstones would not be actually supported by the gravel-size particles. Another confusing concept of the Embry and Klovan 1971 classification concerns the class floatstone, proposed for rocks containing more than 10 of allochems larger than 2 mm, but supported by any type of finer-grained carbonate material, comprising carbonate sand, mud, or a mix of these. This was also acknowledged and criticized by Wright 1992 . As the depositional energy and the porosity of a floatstone with micritic matrix is obviously very different from one with a carbonate sand matrix, this classification is dubious regarding both the interpretation of depositional environment and of reservoir quality. The Dunham 1962 and the Embry and Klovan 1971 classification system present serious conceptual problems, and their application, even by experienced carbonate petrologists, is problematic and contradictory see, e.g., Lokier and Al Junaibi 2016 . Nevertheless, the characteristic in situ pre-salt rocks composed by Mg-clays matrix, calcite spherulites, and shrubs clearly cannot be framed within any of the classical classification systems designed for marine carbonates. WHY ANOTHER PRE-SALT CLASSIFICATION Terra et al. 2010 published in Portuguese the first classification system for the pre-salt rocks. There were some issues in that system involving conceptual questions, genetically biased categories, as well as mixed descriptive and genetic definitions, structural, textural, and compositional Downloaded from http pubs.geoscienceworld.org sepm jsedres article-pdf 93 10 693 5989387 i1938-3681-93-10-693.pdf by COORDENACAO DE APERFEICOAMENTO DE PESSOAL DE NIVEL SUPERIOR CAPES user 698 L.F. DE ROS AND D.M. OLIVEIRA JSR FIG. 5. Wright and Barnett 2017, 2020 system for the facies classification of pre-salt deposits. Comments in the text. Modified from Wright and Barnett 2020 . categories, with confusing and or redundant classes. Some examples of such issues include 1 the loose definition of stromatolite for rocks with structure not only stratified or laminated, but also dendriform, arborescent, or shrubby, in contradiction to the Riding 2000 classification for microbial carbonates, and together with the redundant terms boundstone and dendrolite, 2 the loose definitions of travertine and tufa, 3 the use of the Dunham 1962 and the Embry and Klovan 1971 wackestone, packstone, and floatstone names for pre-salt rocks devoid of carbonate mud, with Mg-clay depositional matrix and in which the associated carbonate components are in some cases spherulitic calcite aggregates that are diagenetic in origin, and 4 the definition of laminites as fine-grained carbonate rocks with microbial origin and thin, smooth, or crenulated lamination, which are actually replaced Mg-clay deposits. The system proposed by Wright and Barnett 2017, 2020 is, in general, more correct. However, it is relatively complex, with class names difficult to memorize and hard to relate to their specific rock types e.g., F1 2a2 F1c, F5a, etc. Fig. 5 . Class names should be, as much as possible, at least mnemonic. Besides, their system presents some conceptual problems, as the use of wackestone and packstone for resedimented rocks with Mg-clay matrix and devoid of carbonate mud, and the interpretation of rocks originally consisting of Mg-clays, later replaced by microcrystalline calcite and or dolomite as laminated carbonate mudstones their class F3 . Detailed examination of the fine-grained laminated pre-salt rocks revealed that that they were generated by the diagenetic replacement of laminated Mg-clays by calcite, dolomite, or silica, and not from a micritic originally carbonate mud matrix Lima and De Ros 2019 Carramal et al. 2022 . Another important question refers to the importance of discriminating rocks made by abundant, coalesced spherulites and or shrubs from those with non-coalesced spherulites and or shrubs within an abundant Mgclays matrix or their replacement products. Azere do et al. 2021 proposed a facies classification scheme similar to that of Wright and Barnett 2017, 2020 , with the same terminological problems and operational complexity. The classification system proposed by Gomes et al. 2020 properly considered the relative contribution of depositional and early diagenetic components, sediment mineralogy, and dissolution for an insight into depositional conditions and reservoir quality of the pre-salt rocks. Their classification for in situ deposits correctly ascribes their formation to three basic syngenetic and early diagenetic constituents mud matrix mostly Mg-clays , calcite spherulites, and fascicular shrubs Fig. 6 . It contains, however, some definition problems and a certain bias towards representing essentially the reservoir types, ignoring that the syngenetic or diagenetic constituents that constitute the in situ sag deposits occur in all proportions and mixing patterns. The common occurrence of shrubs within mud matrix, for instance, is ignored. Besides, they failed to recognize that the mudstones evolved from heterogeneous diagenetic replacement of laminated Mg-clays by calcite, dolomite, or silica. FIG. 6. Diagram proposed by Gomes et al. 2020 for the classification of the in situ deposits of the Barra Velha Formation, pre-salt section of Santos Basin. Comments in the text. Modified from Gomes et al. 2020 . Downloaded from http pubs.geoscienceworld.org sepm jsedres article-pdf 93 10 693 5989387 i1938-3681-93-10-693.pdf by COORDENACAO DE APERFEICOAMENTO DE PESSOAL DE NIVEL SUPERIOR CAPES user JSR CLASSIFICATION OF PRE-SALT ROCKS FIG. 7. Diagram proposed by Gomes et al. 2020 for the classification of the redeposited rocks from the pre-salt sag section of the Santos Basin. Comments in the text. Modified from Gomes et al. 2020 . Gomes et al. 2020 used the Dunham 1962 and Embry and Klovan 1971 names grainstone, packstone, rudstone for the resedimented rocks, very important and common in the Aptian pre-salt section. As noted before, the Dunham 1962 and Embry and Klovan 1971 classification system presents some serious conceptual problems, and their application, even by experienced carbonate petrologists, is problematic and contradictory see, e.g., Lokier and Al Junaibi 2016 , and the use of terms such as packstone or wackestone is inadequate for pre-salt rocks in which the matrix is made of Mg-clays. Additionally, they propose a compositional classification diagram for these rocks, with the matrix at one vertex, and intraclasts of spherulites and shrubs at the other two Fig. 7 , which is potentially confusing, owing to the mixing of textural and compositional attributes. 699 Recently, Borghi et al. 2022 presented another classification system for the sag pre-salt carbonates of Santos Basin Fig. 8 . Their system incorporates some features of the Gomes et al. 2020 classification but avoiding the problematic use of Embry and Klovan 1971 names, such as packstone, wackestone, or floatstone for the redeposited rocks. Their definitions for those rocks are, however, somewhat confusing, as they affirm that Calcirudites and calcarenites are composed of intra- or extra-clasts mostly of limestone and dolostone, subordinately chert silica, but also including minor silicate minerals grains. These may be considered terrigenous clastics. Deposits consisting of extrabasinal fragments of preexisting carbonate rocks should be instead classified as terrigenous lithic carbonatoclastic rocks calclitites sensu Folk 1968 . They also created the term crustone for crust-like rocks Fig. 8 , which confusingly can present quite different compositions and textures, from fibrous to prismatic, to massive micro- to cryptocrystalline and or micropeloidal, and brushed patterns with vertical moldic pores with calcite incrustations. It is unclear in their scheme what is the difference between rocks essentially made by fascicular shrubs shrubstones and crustones made by the same shrubs. Another somewhat odd feature of their system is naming of rocks made by similar amounts of shrubs, spherulites, and crusts as tupilite from the Tupi Field, the largest in Santos Basin . Another problematic aspect of the Borghi et al. 2022 classification refers to the concept that some pre-salt rocks can have been formed simultaneously by in situ and redepositional processes, termed, e.g., as calcarenitic crustone, or crustose spherulitic calcarenite Fig. 8 . Although the intercalation of in situ and intraclastic deposits is quite common in the presalt succession, each rock type should be classified separately, for the sake of petrologic and sedimentologic clarity. Considering the problems and limitations of the existing classification systems of the unusual pre-salt rocks, a new classification system is proposed for the in situ and the resedimented deposits of the Aptian section of the pre-salt sag section of the South Atlantic basins. A NEW OPERATIONAL CLASSIFICATION FOR APTIAN PRE-SALT DEPOSITS The classification scheme proposed for the Aptian sag pre-salt in situ deposits of South Atlantic basins corresponds to a triangular diagram Fig. 9 FIG. 8. Classification system proposed by Borghi et al. 2022 for the in situ and redeposited pre-salt rocks, combining compositional and textural aspects. Comments in the text. Downloaded from http pubs.geoscienceworld.org sepm jsedres article-pdf 93 10 693 5989387 i1938-3681-93-10-693.pdf by COORDENACAO DE APERFEICOAMENTO DE PESSOAL DE NIVEL SUPERIOR CAPES user 700 L.F. DE ROS AND D.M. OLIVEIRA FIG. 9. Proposed classification diagram for the in situ pre-salt sag deposits. Discussion in the text. JSR FIG. 11. Proposed textural classification diagram for hybrid sensu Zuffa 1980 re-sedimented pre-salt sag deposits. Modified from Folk 1968 textural classification for clastic deposits. with mud-size matrix, essentially constituted by stevensite and other syngenetic Mg-silicates, calcite spherulites and shrubs as vertices, and proportional fields for the predominance and mixing of these components. The class names are to be complemented with primary structural e.g., stratified, laminated, massive, etc. , fabric coalesced or non-coalesced spherulites and or shrubs , and main alterations and modifications partially or extensively dolomitized, silicified, recrystallized, dissolved, fractured, etc. . It is important to notice that the classes are meant to correspond to the original proportion among the three main components, reconstructed considering their alteration products and dissolution. For the purpose of compositional reconstruction, the recognition of the remnants of the depositional matrix and the framework components, and of the inheritance of the primary fabric in the alteration products is seminal. This is a key factor for the description of the pre-salt rocks since the Mg-clay components are both mechanical and chemically labile. For some guidelines on how to recognize and describe the key constituents, features, and paragenetic relations identified in the pre-salt rocks, we refer to the following works FIG. 10. Proposed textural classification diagram for the re-sedimented carbonate pre-salt sag deposits. Modified from Folk 1968 textural classification for clastic deposits, with class names adapted from Grabau 1904 and Bramkamp and Powers 1958 . FIG. 12. Proposed high-hierarchy compositional classification diagram for presalt hybrid rocks, based on Zuffa 1980 concepts. Downloaded from http pubs.geoscienceworld.org sepm jsedres article-pdf 93 10 693 5989387 i1938-3681-93-10-693.pdf by COORDENACAO DE APERFEICOAMENTO DE PESSOAL DE NIVEL SUPERIOR CAPES user JSR CLASSIFICATION OF PRE-SALT ROCKS 701 FIG. 13. Examples of application of the proposed system. All photos with crossed polarizers. A Laminated mudstone with Mg-clays and minor terrigenous silt, partially replaced by microcrystalline calcite stained pink . B Laminated mudstone with Mg-clays and minor terrigenous silt, extensively replaced by microcrystalline calcite. C Muddy spherulstone with Mg-clay matrix replaced and displaced by calcite spherulites stained pink and by microcrystalline calcite. D Coalesced spherulstone with recrystallized spherulites and mud level arrow . E Shrubstone of coalesced fascicular calcite aggregates. F Muddy shrubstone of heterogeneously coalesced fascicular aggregates and peloidal clay matrix arrows . Downloaded from http pubs.geoscienceworld.org sepm jsedres article-pdf 93 10 693 5989387 i1938-3681-93-10-693.pdf by COORDENACAO DE APERFEICOAMENTO DE PESSOAL DE NIVEL SUPERIOR CAPES user 702 L.F. DE ROS AND D.M. OLIVEIRA JSR FIG. 14. Examples of application of the proposed system. A Contact between muddy spherulstone with partially dolomitized matrix and muddy shrubstone of fascicular and transitional forms and partially silicified interstitial clay matrix. XP. B Contact between muddy shrubstone of laterally coalesced fascicular aggregates, and heterogeneously coalesced muddy spherulstone. XP. C Detail of mudstone with clay matrix partially replaced by dolomite rhombs, microcrystalline calcite pink and framboidal pyrite black . XP. D Rudaceous calcarenite of spherulitic, fascicular and microcrystalline microbial intraclasts, with interparticle and some intraparticle porosity. P. E Slightly rudaceous calcarenite of spherulitic, fascicular and microcrystalline intraclasts, with porosity reduced by compaction and limited calcite rim cementation. P. F Muddy spherulstone intensely recrystallized and partially silicified. XP. Downloaded from http pubs.geoscienceworld.org sepm jsedres article-pdf 93 10 693 5989387 i1938-3681-93-10-693.pdf by COORDENACAO DE APERFEICOAMENTO DE PESSOAL DE NIVEL SUPERIOR CAPES user JSR CLASSIFICATION OF PRE-SALT ROCKS Herlinger et al. 2017 Lima and De Ros 2019 Carramal et al. 2022. As in any rock classification scheme, the volumetric estimation is conducted solely considering the mineral mass, and then the related values should be normalized to 100 . As already discussed, all systems previously proposed for the classification of reworked rocks of the pre-salt sag interval Terra et al. 2010 Wright and Barnett 2017, 2020 Gomes et al. 2020 present severe problems and limitations. The major problem of those proposals is acquired from the use of names created by Dunham 1962 and Embry and Klovan 1971 for conventional marine carbonate deposits containing carbonate depositional matrix, such as wackestone, packstone, and floatstone, for pre-salt sag rocks devoid of carbonate mud, and which mud matrix is originally constituted by Mg-clays. We also discuss the lack of conceptual consistence of the Embry and Klovan 1971 system, as only little more than 10 of allochems larger than 2 mm are not enough to support the fabric of a rudstone, and floatstones with mud and sand carbonate matrix would present quite different depositional energy and reservoir-quality significance. The best option for a consistent textural classification system for the resedimented sag deposits is represented by a purely textural system with depositional and reservoir-quality coherence. Our proposal combines classes defined based on a modified version of the Folk 1968 textural classification for clastic deposits, with names adapted from the Grabau 1904 and the Bramkamp and Powers 1958 classifications Fig. 10 . The 30 limit of the rudaceous rocks is coherent with the support of the fabric by the . 2 mm particles, and the distinction between muddy and arenaceous calcirudites allows for the important differentiation between types with low and high energy and reservoir quality. Additionally, a complementary term can be used to make explicit the fabric support of rudaceous rocks as, e.g., mud-supported or grain-supported. Generic textural names arenite, rudite, lutite can be applied to the classification of rocks made by different grain compositions and mixtures of carbonate, clay, siliciclastic, phosphate, and other types of grains Fig. 11 . A high-hierarchy compositional classification, based on the Zuffa 1980 classification of hybrid arenites, is proposed for the pre-salt sag resedimented deposits, as of other mixed or hybrid particulate rocks Fig. 12 . Such organization allows a continuous textural classification between pure compositional end-members e.g., siliciclastic volcanoclastic and carbonate rocks and the correspondent two-component hybrid rock that is not constrained by criteria exclusive to one of the compositional classes. The resedimented hybrid pre-salt rocks usually consist of a combination of three components, which constitute the vertices of a high-hierarchy classification triangle intrabasinal Mg-clays, intrabasinal carbonate, and siliciclastic volcaniclastic grains Fig. 12 . Intrabasinal Mg-clays particles correspond to ooids, peloids, and intraclasts Carramal et al. 2022 . Intrabasinal carbonate particles are essentially represented by intraclasts of fascicular and spherulitic calcite aggregates Gomes et al. 2020 Carvalho et al. 2022 . The siliciclastic volcaniclastic component is usually represented by volcanic rock fragments and by clasts of plutonic origin, such as granitic gneissic fragments and associated monocrystalline quartz and feldspar grains Vieira de Luca et al. 2017 Carvalho et al. 2022 . The term volcaniclastic applied here is a generic one and is conceptualized and discussed by Fisher 1961, 1966 . It is important to consider that, in this scheme, volcanic clasts from intrabasinal and extrabasinal origins are not differentiated. Thus, for detailed provenance studies, another classification triangle would be required for the genetic distinction between different volcanic fragments. A similar adjustment would be required where lithoclasts from the bioclastic calcarenites and calcirudites coquinas of the rift section Carbonate Extrabasinal in Zuffa s 1985 scheme are relevant, as locally observed in the Mero Field Rocha et al. 2021 . To avoid conceptual problems derived from the various textural definitions and grain-size boundaries for the mud fraction e.g., Dunham 1962 Embry and Klovan 1971 Folk 1968 , we suggest adopting the 62 mm limit used by Folk 1968 . A grain-size approach similar to that used for the 703 sandstones can be applied to refine the texture of the lutites as coarse, medium, and fine, as proposed by Lazar et al. 2015 . In their scheme, a coarse mudstone has more than two-thirds of the mud-size grains as coarse mud coarse silt, . 32 mm , a fine mudstone has more than twothirds of the mud-size grains as fine mud clay and fine silt , 8 mm , whereas a medium mudstone has neither coarse nor fine mud as more than two-thirds of the mud-size grains. As discussed for the coarser-grained rocks, the standardization of the textural definitions for the lutites enables a continuous rock textural classification between different compositional classes, and hybrid types. Additionally, the detailed size distinction in the mudsize range acknowledges the different hydrodynamic behavior and dispersal mechanisms of coarse silt-size fraction compared to the clay-size fraction Lazar et al. 2015 , and, at the same time, incorporates the operational limitation on optical recognition of the fine-mud fraction. The textural names are to be complemented with information regarding the main compositional constituents e.g., intraclasts, ooids, etc. , primary structural characteristics e.g., stratified, laminated, massive, etc. , and main alterations and modifications partially or extensively dolomitized, silicified, recrystallized, dissolved, fractured, etc. . Rocks strongly altered by diagenetic and hydrothermal processes, in which original texture and composition are no longer recognizable, can be called by the classical names sparite or microsparite if recrystallized , dolosparite or dolostone, or microdolosparite if dolomitized , and chert if silicified . Examples of application of the proposed system can be seen in Figures 13 and 14. It can be perceived that this system offers a more coherent and consistent correspondence with the characteristic pre-salt rock types and with their reservoir-quality aspects. With the proposal of a coherent, simple, and operational classification system for the unusual, yet extremely important, South Atlantic Aptian pre-salt reservoirs and associated rocks, we hope to contribute to the understanding, exploration, and production of this extraordinary petroleum province. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The present paper was developed and improved through discussions with many colleagues from UFRGS, PUCRS, UFRJ, Petrobras, and other companies. We thank Petrobras for permission to publish this proposal. REFERENCES ABELHA, M., AND PETERSOHN, E., 2018, The state of the art of the Brazilian pre-salt exploration American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Annual Convention and Exhibition, Search and Discovery Article 30586. AZERE DO, A.C., DUARTE, L.V., AND SILVA, A.P., 2021, The challenging carbonates from the Pre-Salt reservoirs offshore Brazil facies, palaeoenvironment and diagenesis Journal of South American Earth Sciences, v. 108, no. 103202. BISSEL, H.J., AND CHILINGAR, G.V., 1967, Classification of sedimentary carbonate rocks, in Larsen, G., and Chilingar, G.V., eds., Diagenesis in Sediments Amsterdam, Elsevier, Developments in Sedimentology 8, p. 87 168. BORGHI, L., SILVA, M.C.A.S., FAVORETO, J., AND SANTOS, J., 2022, Defining a new common language a multi-scale classification for the pre-salt carbonates of the Barra Velha Formation Rio de Janeiro, Rio Oil and Gas Expo and Conference, Proceedings, 12 p. BRAMKAMP, R.A., AND POWERS, R.W., 1958, Classification of Arabian carbonate rocks Geological Society of America, Bulletin, v. 69, p. 1305 1317. CARMINATTI, M., WOLFF, B., AND GAMBOA, L., 2008, New exploratory frontiers in Brazil Madrid, 19th World Petroleum Congress, Proceedings, 11 p. CARRAMAL, N.G., OLIVEIRA, D.M., CACELA, A.S.M., CUGLIERI, M.A.A., ROCHA, N.P., VIANA, S.M., TOLEDO, S.L.V., PEDRINHA, S., AND DE ROS, L.F., 2022, Paleoenvironmental insights from the deposition and diagenesis of Aptian pre-salt magnesium silicates from the Lula Field, Santos Basin, Brazil Journal of Sedimentary Research, v. 92, p. 12 31. CARVALHO, A.M.A., HAMON, Y., SOUZA, O.G., Jr., CARRAMAL, N.G., AND COLLARD, N., 2022, Facies and diagenesis distribution in an Aptian pre-salt carbonate reservoir of the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil a comprehensive quantitative approach Marine and Petroleum Geology, v. 141, no. 105708, 25 p. CHABOUREAU, A.C., GUILLOCHEAU, F., ROBIN, C., ROHAIS, S., MOULIN, M., AND ASLANIAN, D., 2013, Paleogeographic evolution of the central segment of the South Atlantic during Early Cretaceous times paleotopographic and geodynamic implications Tectonophysics, v. 604, p. 191 223. Downloaded from http pubs.geoscienceworld.org sepm jsedres article-pdf 93 10 693 5989387 i1938-3681-93-10-693.pdf by COORDENACAO DE APERFEICOAMENTO DE PESSOAL DE NIVEL SUPERIOR CAPES user 704 L.F. DE ROS AND D.M. OLIVEIRA CHOQUETTE, P.W., AND PRAY, L.C., 1970, Geologic nomenclature and classification of porosity in sedimentary carbonates American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Bulletin, v. 54, p. 207 250. DAVISON, I., 2007, Geology and tectonics of the South Atlantic Brazilian salt basins, in Ries, A.C., Butler, R.W., and Graham, R.H., eds., Deformation of the Continental Crust The Legacy of Mike Coward Geological Society of London, Special Publication 272, p. 345 359. DUNHAM, R.J., 1962, Classification of carbonate rocks according to depositional texture, in Ham, W.E., ed., Classification of Carbonate Rocks American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir 1, p. 108 122. EMBRY, A.F., AND KLOVAN, J.E., 1971, A late Devonian reef tract on northeastern Banks Island NWT Bulletin of Canadian Petroleum Geology, v. 19, p. 730 781. FARIA, D.L.P, REIS, A.T., AND SOUZA, O.G., Jr., 2017, Three-dimensional stratigraphic sedimentological forward modeling of an Aptian carbonate reservoir deposited during the sag stage in the Santos basin, Brazil Marine and Petroleum Geology, v. 88, p. 676 695. FERREIRA, D.J.A., DUTRA, H.P.L., CASTRO, T.M., AND LUPINACCI, W.M., 2021a, Geological process modeling and geostatistics for facies reconstruction of pre-salt carbonates Marine and Petroleum Geology, v. 124, 104828. FERREIRA, D.J.A., DIAS, R.M., AND LUPINACCI, W.M., 2021b, Seismic pattern classification integrated with permeability porosity evaluation for reservoir characterization of presalt carbonates in the Bu zios Field, Brazil Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering, v. 201, no. 108441. FISHER, R.V., 1961, Proposed classification of volcaniclastic sediments and rocks Geological Society of America, Bulletin, v. 72, p. 1409 1414. FISHER, R.V., 1966, Rocks composed of volcanic fragments and their classification Earth Science Reviews, v. 1, p. 287 298. FOLK, R.L., 1959, Practical petrographic classification of limestones American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Bulletin, v. 43, p. 1 38. FOLK, R.L., 1962, Spectral subdivision of limestone types, in Ham, W.E., ed., Classification of Carbonate Rocks American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir 1, p. 62 84. FOLK, R.L., 1968, Petrology of Sedimentary Rocks Austin, Hemphill Publishing, 107 p. GOMES, J.P., BUNEVICH, R.B., TEDESCHI, L.R., TUCKER, M.E., AND WHITAKER, F.F., 2020, Facies classification and patterns of lacustrine carbonate deposition of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazilian Pre-salt Marine and Petroleum Geology, v. 113, p. 104 176. GRABAU, A.W., 1904, On the classification of sedimentary rocks American Geologist, v. 33, p. 228 247. HERLINGER, R., Jr., ZAMBONATO, E.E., AND DE ROS, L.F., 2017, Influence of diagenesis on the quality of lower cretaceous pre-salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs from northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil Journal of Sedimentary Research, v. 87, p. 1285 1313. KENDALL, A.C., 1977, Fascicular-optic calcite a replacement of bundled acicular carbonate sediments Journal of Sedimentary Petrology, v. 47, p. 1056 1062. LAWSON, M., SITGREAVES, J., RASBURY, T., WOOTON, K., ESCH, W., MARCON, V., HENARES, S., KONSTANTINOU, A., KNELLER, E., GOMBOSI, D., TORRES, V., SILVA, A., ALEVATO, R., WREN, M., BECKER, S., AND EILER, J., 2022, New age and lake chemistry constraints on the Aptian pre-salt carbonates of the central South Atlantic Geological Society of America, Bulletin, v. 135, p. 595 607. LIMA, B.E.M., AND DE ROS, L.F., 2019, Deposition, diagenetic and hydrothermal processes in the Aptian Pre-Salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs of the northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil Sedimentary Geology, v. 383, p. 55 81. LIMA, B.E.M., TEDESCHI, L.R., PESTILHO, A.L.S., SANTOS, R.V., VAZQUEZ, J.C., GUZZO, J.V.P., AND DE ROS, L.F., 2020, Deep-burial hydrothermal alteration of the Pre-salt carbonate reservoirs from northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil evidence from petrography, fluid inclusions, Sr, C and O isotopes Marine and Petroleum Geology, v. 113, 104143. LOKIER, S.W., AND AL JUNAIBI, M., 2016, The petrographic description of carbonate facies Are we all speaking the same language Sedimentology, v. 63, p. 1843 1885. MUNIZ, M.C., AND BOSENCE, D.W.J., 2015, Pre-salt microbialites from the Campos Basin offshore Brazil image log facies, facies model and cyclicity in lacustrine carbonates, in Bosence, D.W.J., Gibbons, K.A., Le Heron, D.P., Morgan, W.A., Pritchard, T., and Vining, B.A., eds., Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production Geological Society of London, Special Publication 418, p. 221 242. PIETZSCH, R., TEDESCHI, L.R., OLIVEIRA, D.M., ANJOS, C.W.D., VAZQUEZ, J.C., AND FIGUEIREDO, M.F., 2020, Environmental conditions of deposition of the Lower Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin Brazil , based on stable carbon and oxygen isotopes a continental record of pCO2 during the onset of the Oceanic Anoxic Event 1a OAE 1a interval Chemical Geology, v. 535, 119457. PINTO, V.H.G., MANATSCHAL, G., KARPOFF, A.M., ULRICH, M., AND VIANA, A.R., 2017, Seawater storage and element transfer associated with mantle serpentinization in magmapoor rifted margins a quantitative approach Earth and Planetary Science Letters, v. 459, p. 227 237. LAZAR, O.R., BOHACS, K.M., MACQUAKER, J.H.S., SCHIEBER, J., AND DEMKO, T.M., 2015, Capturing key attributes of fine-grained sedimentary rocks in outcrops, cores and thin JSR sections nomenclature and description guidelines Journal of Sedimentary Research, v. 85, p. 230 246. RIDING, R., 2000, Microbial carbonates the geological record of calcified bacterial algal mats and biofilms Sedimentology, v. 47, Suppl. 1, p. 179 2014. ROCHA, L., FAVORETO, J., AND BORGHI, L., 2021, Coquinas da Formac a o Itapema, campo de Mero pre -sal da Bacia de Santos ana lise de microfa cies e paleoambiente deposicional Anua rio do Instituto de Geocie ncias, v. 44, 39883. SABATO CERALDI, T., AND GREEN, D., 2017, Evolution of the South Atlantic lacustrine deposits in response to Early Cretaceous rifting, subsidence and lake hydrology, in Sabato Ceraldi, T., Hodgkinson, R.A., and Backe, G., eds., Petroleum Geoscience of the West Africa Margin Geological Society of London, Special Publication 438, p. 77 98. SALLER, A., RUSHTON, S., BUAMBUA, L., INMAN, K., MCNEIL, R., AND DICKSON, J.A.D., 2016, Pre-Salt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Bulletin, v. 100, p. 1135 1164. SOUZA, R.S., ARIENTI, L.M., VIANA, S.M., FALCA O, L.C., CUGLIERI, M.A.A., FILHO, R.P.S., LEITE, C.O.N., OLIVEIRA, V., OLIVEIRA, D.M., RAMNANI, C.W., PIETZSCH, R., CARMO, I.O., AND COELHO, C., 2018, Petrology of the hydrothermal and evaporitic continental Cretaceous Aptian pre-salt carbonates and associated rocks, South Atlantic Santos Basin, offshore Brazil American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Annual Conference Exhibition, Salt Lake City. SZATMARI, P., AND MILANI, E.J., 2016, Tectonic control of the oil-rich large igneous carbonate salt province of the South Atlantic rift Marine and Petroleum Geology, v. 77, p. 567 596. SZATMARI, P., LIMA, C. M., FONTANETA, G., LIMA, N.M., ZAMBONATO, E.E., MENEZES, M.R., BAHNIUK, J., COELHO, S.L., FIGUEIREDO, M., FLORENCIO, C.P., AND GONTIJO, R., 2021, Petrography, geochemistry and origin of South Atlantic evaporites the Brazilian side Marine and Petroleum Geology, v. 127, 104805. TEBOUL, P.A., KLUSKA, J.M., MARTY, N.C.M., DEBURE, M., DURLET, C., VIRGONE, A., AND GAUCHER, E.C., 2017, Volcanic rock alterations of the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola insights from an integrated petrological, geochemical and numerical approach Marine and Petroleum Geology, v. 80, p. 394 411. TERRA, G.J.S., SPADINI, A.R., FRANC A, A.B., SOMBRA, C.L., ZAMBONATO, E.E., JUSCHAKS, L. C.S., ARIENTI, L.M., ERTHAL, M.M., BLAUTH, M., FRANCO, M.P., MATSUDA, N.S., SILVA, N. G.C., MORETTI, P.A., Jr., D AVILA, R.S.F., SOUZA, R.S., TONIETTO, S.N., ANJOS, S.M.C., CAMPINHO, V.S., AND WINTER, W.R., 2010, Classificac a o de rochas carbona ticas aplica vel a s bacias sedimentares brasileiras Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, v. 18, p. 9 29. TOSCA, N.J., AND WRIGHT, V.P., 2015, Diagenetic pathways linked to labile Mg-clays in lacustrine carbonate reservoirs a model for the origin of secondary porosity in the Cretaceous pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, offshore Brazil, in Armitage, P.J., Butcher, A.R., Churchill, J.M., Csoma, A.E., Hollis, C., Lander, R.H., Omma, J.E., and Worden, R.H., eds., Reservoir Quality of Clastic and Carbonate Rocks Analysis, Modelling and Prediction Geological Society of London, Special Publication 435, p. 33 46. VIEIRA DE LUCA, P.H., MATIAS, H., CARBALLO, J., SINEVA, D., PIMENTEL, G.A., TRITLLA, J., ESTEBAN, M., LOMA, R., ALONSO, J.L.A., JIME NEZ, L.P., PONTET, M., AND MARTINEZ, P.B., 2017, Breaking barriers and paradigms in presalt exploration the Pa o de Ac u car discovery offshore Brazil , in Merrill, R.K., and Sternbach, C.A., eds., Giant Fields of the Decade 2000 2010 American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir 113, p. 177 194. WRIGHT, V.P., 1992, A revised classification of limestones Sedimentary Geology, v. 76, p. 177 185. WRIGHT, V.P., 2022, The mantle, CO2 and the giant Aptian chemogenic lacustrine carbonate factory of the South Atlantic some carbonates are made, not born Sedimentology, v. 69, p. 47 73. WRIGHT, V.P., AND BARNETT, A.J., 2015, An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates, in Bosence, D.W.J., et al., eds., Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production Geological Society of London, Special Publication 418, p. 209 219. WRIGHT, V.P., AND BARNETT, A.J., 2017, Classifying reservoir carbonates when the status quo simply does not work a case study from the Cretaceous of the South Atlantic American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Annual Convention and Exhibition, Search and Discovery Article 51419. WRIGHT, V.P., AND BARNETT, A.J., 2020, The textural evolution and ghost matrices of the Cretaceous Barra Velha Formation carbonates from the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil Facies, v. 66, 18 p. ZUFFA, G.G., 1980, Hybrid arenites their composition and classification Journal of Sedimentary Petrology, v. 50, p. 21 29. ZUFFA, G.G., 1985, Optical analyses of arenites influence methodology of compositional results, in Zuffa, G.G., ed., Provenance of Arenites Dordrecht, Netherlands, Reidel Publishing Company, NATO ASI, Series C, v. 148, p. 165 189. Received 25 November 2022 accepted 13 July 2023. Downloaded from http pubs.geoscienceworld.org sepm jsedres article-pdf 93 10 693 5989387 i1938-3681-93-10-693.pdf by COORDENACAO DE APERFEICOAMENTO DE PESSOAL DE NIVEL SUPERIOR CAPES user

[END_OF_PAPER]

Geological Characterization and Modeling of an Aptian Carbonate Reservoir in the Santos Basin, Brazil Ana Paula Tanaka1, Desiree Faria1, Joa o Paulo Gomes1, and Olinto de Souza Jr1 Search and Discovery Article 11128 2018 Posted September 17, 2018 Adapted from oral presentation given at AAPG 2018 AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition, Salt Lake City, Utah, May 20-23, 2018 Datapages 2018 Serial rights given by author. For all other rights contact author directly. DOI 10.1306 11128Tanaka2018 1 Petrobras S.A., Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil desiree.lpfaria gmail.com Abstract The offshore of Santos Basin, in the Brazilian Southeastern continental margin, accommodates a huge hydrocarbon province. In the early 2000 s, oil discoveries in deep and ultra-deep waters, located in the Barremian-Aptian carbonate section, brought a new economic interest to the area. In this work, we will focus on an Aptian carbonate platform, which composes one of the most prolific oil fields of this province. The work aims to present the geological context of the area and propose a workflow for the geological characterization and modeling to better understand the spatial distribution of the sedimentary facies and permo-porosity that can define preferential producing stratigraphic zones and flow paths. For this goal, the geological model represented by the structural, stratigraphic, facies, and permo-porosity models will be presented. Sedimentological studies identified five main carbonate facies in the studied sequence grainstones, stromatolites shrubs, spherulitites, laminites, and wackestones mudstones. The cycles defined by facies successions allowed the interpretation of stratigraphic surfaces that can be correlated throughout the field and separate the section into five main zones. A stratigraphic-sedimentological forward facies model was constructed to reproduce the sedimentary stacking pattern observed from well data, based on the simulation and tests of different parameters that act in the depositional process of carbonate rocks base level oscillations and carbonate depositional rate. The facies model is used to guide the permo-porosity distribution. The permeability distribution requires the definition of rock types, with different classes of permeability, and fracture zones. Based on 3D forward modeling, the best set of environmental conditions able to explain the pattern of carbonate deposition observed in the study area are a slow carbonate depositional rate and lake-level oscillations which were essentially induced by arid climatic conditions. In terms of reservoir quality, the better reservoir facies are stromatolites and grainstones. The higher permeabilities are a combination of the primary porosity connection, increased by dissolution and fractures. The integration of this work allows an understanding of the sedimentological processes acting in the platform, the facies and permo-porosity distribution between wells and helps in the improvement of the predictability of the production curves that can be confirmed by real production performance. References Cited Amaefule, J.O., M. Altunbay, D. Tiab, D.G. Kersey, and D.K. Keelan, 1993, Enhanced Reservoir Description Using Core and Log Data to Identify Hydraulic Flow Units and Predict Permeability in Uncored Intervals Wells Society of Petroleum Engineers, SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition, 3-6 October, Houston, Texas, SPE-26436-MS, 16 p. doi.org 10.2118 26436-MS Bento Freire, E., 2012, Caracterizac a o estratigra fica em alta resoluc a o das seque ncias calcarias de origem microbiana do intervalo paleoce nico da Formac a o Yacoraite Seque ncia Balbuena IV na regia o de Salta -Argentina Master s Thesis, Curso de Geologia, Instituto de Geocie ncias, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, 243 p. Faria, D.L.P., A.T. Reis, O.G. Souza Jr, 2017, Three-Dimensional Stratigraphic-Sedimentological Forward Modeling of an Aptian Carbonate Reservoir Deposited During the Sag Stage in the Santos Basin, Brazil Marine and Petroleum Geology, v. 88, p. 676-695. Milani, E.J., H.D. Rangel, G.V. Bueno, J.M. Stica, W.R. Winter, J.M. Caixeta, and O.P. Neto, 2007, Bacias sedimentares brasileiras cartas estratigra ficas Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, v. 15 2, p. 265-287. Moreira, J.L.P., C.V. Madeira, J.A. Gil, and M.A.P. Machado, 2007, Bacia de Santos Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, Rio de Janeiro, v. 15 2, p. 531-549. Terra, G.G.S., A.R. Spadini, A.B. Franca, C.L. Sombra, E.E. Zambonato, L.C. da Silva Juschaks, L.M. Arienti, M.M. Erthal, M. Blauth, M.P. Franco, N.S. Matsuda, N.G. Carramalda Silva, P.A. Moreti Junior, R.S. D Avila, R.S. Souza, S.N. Tonietto, S.M.C. Anjos, V.S. Campinho, and W.R. Winter, 2010, Classificac a o de rochas carbona ticasaplica vel as bacias sedimentares brasileiras Boletim de Geocie ncias Petrobras, v. 18, p. 9-29. Tucker, M.E., and V.P. Wright, 1990, Carbonate Sedimentology, First Edition Oxford, Blackwell, 482 p. Geological characterization and modeling of an Aptian carbonate reservoir in the Santos Basin, Brazil Ana Paula Tanaka Desiree Faria Joa o Paulo Gomes Olinto de Souza Jr. Geological characterization and modeling of an Aptian carbonate reservoir in the Santos Basin, Brazil Ana Paula Tanaka Desiree Faria Joa o Paulo Gomes Olinto de Souza Jr. Acknowledgements Petrobras and BMS-9 partners for the permission to publish this study and the field team. Location Modified from Milani et al. 2007 Santos basin 310 km from coast Aptian isolated carbonate platform Tucker Wrigth, 1990 Faria, D.L.P., Reis, A.T. Souza Jr, O.G., 2017 Stratigraphic context Reservoir Barra Velha Fm. carbonates Modified from Moreira et al. 2007 Field Salt base map 1 oil jan 2013 Drilled wells 29 17 producers 8 water injectors 2 gas injectors 2 wags 6 cored wells 390 m 1879 side samples 24 wells simple completion dual completion Depth m oil water contact Pretests 29 wells Depositional model Ciclicity analysis Spectral GR U-Th-K and total GR Stacking pattern GST-SPH-STR-LMT Modified from Bento Freire, 2012 IFS initial flooding surface IES initial exposure surface MHS - maximum humidity surface MLS - maximum lowering surface MFS maximum flooding surface Well BR-3 High resolution stratigraphy A B raising lowering C GRAINSTONE LAMINITE SPHERULITITE STROMATOLITE D Well BR-3 High resolution stratigraphy A B raising lowering C GRAINSTONE LAMINITE SPHERULITITE STROMATOLITE D Reservoir Zonation Well BR-12 Well BR-3 A B C D E Well BR-10 Well BR-8 BR-3 Zones on seismic A A vertical exaggeration 3x BR-3 Zones on seismic A A vertical exaggeration 3x Facies log Facies description Geological model workflow Facies proportion Forward modeling matrix Amaefule et al.,1993 Facies model Fracture Model Probabilsitic model Methodology Trend K matrix K fracture fracture Facies log 1D trend Forward modeling 3D trend 3D facies proportion matrix using depositional processes modeling Probabilsitic model Facies model facies log using the rock descriptions and image log facies geostatistical simulation to honor well data Stratigraphic-sedimentological forward modeling can be used to test and quantify concepts about the evolution of the carbonate platform. For each time step chosen, 3 main processes are considered i Accomodation space subsidence lake level ii Production of carbonate facies by time m My Subsidence 0.05mm y Deposition 0.08mm y Faria, D.L.P., Reis, A.T. Souza Jr, O.G., 2017 iii Coefficient of carbonate facies productivity by bathymetric range 2D trend for each zone Porosity model 1D data GST matrix Meso Super Macro pore Nano Micro Macro FU1 For a facies, the same porosity may have different permeability values Probabilsitic facies model Permeability model Different types of rocks can have similar flow properties matrix FU3 K matrix Amaefule et al.,1993 Discrete Fracture Network Fracture Model Fracture model DFN fracture z m K fracture pressure psi Faults Seismic Fractures Well Strain Vector-azimuth Attributes Pre-test Conclusions The forward stratigraphic-sedimentological model was able to build a 3D facies distribution matrix to be used as a trend in the facies probabilistic model The combination of impedance and structural maps as a 2D trend in the porosity model seems to be realistic when compared to well data The permeability model, based on FZI concept and controlled by facies and porosity, can characterize the permeability generated by the diagenesis of the rocks, which impacts directly on the reservoir quality The 2 2k model indicates the permeability anisotropies and was the most suitable configuration for the history match This workflow allowed us to build a geological model that represents most of the reservoir s facies and permoporosity heterogeneities. This is fundamental for the history match and production prediction, to improve the field management and to generate more accurate production curves Co-working learning and experience exchange are essential for the constant improvement of the techniques shown in this workflow. References Amaefule, J. O., Altunbay, M., Tiab, D., Kersey, D. G., Keelan, D. K. 1993 . Enhanced reservoir description using core and log data to identify hydraulic flow units and predict permeability in uncored intervals wells. In SPE annual technical conference and exhibition. Society of Petroleum Engineers. Bento Freire, E. 2012 . Caracterizac a o estratigra fica em alta resoluc a o das seque ncias calcarias de origem microbiana do intervalo paleoce nico da Formac a o Yacoraite Seque ncia Balbuena IV na regia o de Salta - Argentina. Thesis Master .Curso de Geologia, Instituto de Geocie ncias, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, 243p. Faria, D. L.P., Reis, A. T., Souza Jr, O. G. 2017 . Three-dimensional stratigraphic-sedimentological forward modeling of an Aptian carbonate reservoir deposited during the sag stage in the Santos basin, Brazil. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 88, 676-695. Milani, E. J., Rangel, H. D., Bueno, G. V., Stica, J. M., Winter, W. R., Caixeta, J. M., Neto, O. P. 2007 . Bacias sedimentares brasileiras cartas estratigra ficas. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, 15 1 . Moreira, J.L.P., Madeira, C.V., Gil, J.A., Machado, M.A.P. 2007 . Bacia de Santos. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, Rio de Janeiro, 15 2 , 531-549. Terra, G.G.S., Spadini, A.R., Franca, A.B., Sombra, C.L., Zambonato, E.E., da Silva Juschaks, L.C., Arienti, L.M., Erthal, M.M., Blauth, M., Franco, M.P., Matsuda, N.S., Carramal da Silva, N.G., Moreti Junior, P.A., D Avila, R.S., Souza, R.S., Tonietto, S.N., Anjos, S.M.C., Campinho, V.S., Winter, W.R. 2010 . Classificac a o de rochas carbona ticas aplica vel as bacias sedimentares brasileiras. Boletim de Geocie ncias Petrobras, 18, 9-29. Tucker, M.E. Wright, V.P. 1990 . Carbonate Sedimentology. 1. ed. Oxford, Blackwell. 482p.

[END_OF_PAPER]

International Journal of Earth Sciences https doi.org 10.1007 s00531-020-01932-7 ORIGINAL PAPER Sedimentology and petrophysical analysis of pre salt lacustrine carbonate reservoir from the Santos Basin, southeast Brazil Mateus Basso1,2 Aline Maria Poc as Belila2 Guilherme Furlan Chinelatto2 Joa o Paulo da Ponte Souza2,3 Alexandre Campane Vidal1,2 Received 9 March 2020 Accepted 8 September 2020 Geologische Vereinigung e.V. GV 2020 Abstract Lacustrine carbonate deposits mark the rift-sag sedimentation stage of the so-called pre-salt section of the Campos and Santos Basins, in the Southeast Brazilian continental shelf. These salt-sealed carbonate reservoirs form deep-water, giant and prolific oil fields that are currently responsible for approximately 70 of the Brazilian oil and gas production. In the Santos Basin, the sag stage carbonates are represented by the Aptian Barra Velha Formation, characterized by exotic textural and compositional features whose origin, development, and correlation with petrophysical properties have been broadly discussed in the last decade. A geological and petrophysical study has been performed based on core samples, plugs, and thin-sections of a well in the Barra Velha Formation from the eastern Santos Basin. The analyzed core interval was grouped into six depositional facies constituted by the association of five key textural components 1 crystal shrubs 2 calcite spherulites 3 hybrid forms 4 mud-grade carbonates and dolomite and 5 intraclasts. The relationship between the depositional framework and the poroperm system, as evidenced by petrographic image analysis and CT-scan data, is highly complex. The depositional control over porosity is erratic, mainly due to the extensive diagenetic and possible hydrothermal overprint. Dolomite cementation, dolomitization, pervasive silicification, and dissolution processes are the main primary porosity modifiers. Petrophysical analysis indicates that intraclastic and spherulitic grainstones rudstones, affected by matrix dissolution, may present the best reservoir properties, in certain intervals, even surpassing the shrubby framestones, which are widely regarded as the best reservoir facies. This study seeks to contribute to an emerging body of research about the Brazilian pre-salt lacustrine carbonates, broadening the geological knowledge about these deposit, while providing new data to improve hydrocarbon forecast and recovery. Keywords Brazilian pre-salt Santos Basin Cretaceous Lacustrine carbonates CT-scan Petrophysics Introduction Mateus Basso bassomgeo gmail.com 1 Department of Geology and Natural Resources, Geosciences Institute, University of Campinas UNICAMP , Campinas, Brazil 2 Center for Petroleum Studies CEPETRO , University of Campinas UNICAMP , Campus Universitario Zeferino Vaz Bara o Geraldo, Campinas, SP CEP 13083 970, Brazil 3 Department of Energy, School of Mechanical Engineering, University of Campinas UNICAMP , Campinas, Brazil The discovery of giant salt-sealed carbonate reservoirs in ultra-deep waters off Brazil s southeast coast was a turning point for the global oil industry and has established Brazil as being one of the leading centers for offshore oil and gas production Silvestre and Dalcol 2009 Rodrigues and Sauer 2015 . Since the announcement of the giant Lula oil field in 2006 Rosa et al. 2018 , the pre-salt exploration horizons have gradually expanded and a great number of challenges have succeeded, including logistical and infrastructure complications related to the distance of the oil fields from the coast geophysical imaging and well-bore construction problems related to the thick salt layer and great depth of the reservoir and also the high heterogeneity of the reservoirs Beasley et al. 2010 . Among these challenges, the 13 Vol. 0123456789 International Journal of Earth Sciences high geological complexity of the carbonate reservoirs is a scientific frontier that has been broadly discussed in the last decade Terra et al. 2010 Wright and Barnett 2015 Muniz et al. 2015 Ceraldi and Green 2016 Herlinger et al. 2017 , as these reservoirs may be considered non-conventional deposits, with very few analogues in the world and are relatively poorly understood in relation to the siliciclastic reservoirs Nakano et al. 2009 . The pre-salt carbonates were deposited in lacustrine environments, related to the development of rift and sag basins during the breakup of the Gondwana supercontinent and opening of the South Atlantic Ocean in the Late Jurassic Early Cretaceous Chang et al. 1992 Cainelli and Mohriak 1999 Mohriak et al. 2008 . Therefore, genetically linked pre-salt plays i.e., counterparts can be found on both sides of the South Atlantic, occurring in the Brazilian Santos, Campos and Espi rito Santo Basins Carminatti et al. 2008 Wright and Barnett 2015 Herlinger et al. 2017 as well as in the west African Namibe, Kwanza, Congo and Gabon Basins Brownfield and Charpentier 2006 Saller et al. 2016 Ceraldi and Green 2016 . The Brazilian and African pre-salt plays, alongside other important discoveries in China, have placed continental and lacustrine carbonates into the spotlight Herlinger et al. 2017 . Lacustrine carbonate environments are very dynamic and sensitive systems. High and low-frequency changes in climate, water chemistry, and bathymetry result in significant variations of litho- and biofacies and their lateral and vertical distribution patterns Flu gel 2010 . The environmental oscillations control a complex interplay of depositional processes, which are mainly dominated by biogenic-mediated sedimentation abiotic-chemical precipitation variable carbonate clastic input and eolian supply Gierlowski-Kordesch 2010 . Among these processes, the biotic contribution to the pre-salt main reservoir facies is still a point of major controversy, as these deposits were historically classified as microbialites Moreira et al. 2007 Terra et al. 2010 , and recently new abiotic-related models and interpretations are emerging Wright and Barnett 2015 Herlinger et al. 2017 . The variety of depositional processes, the diverse nature of the carbonates, added to the high chemical reactivity of the carbonate minerals and their tendency toward a complex diagenetic history can generate very heterogeneous poroperm systems. Rezende and Pope 2015 quantitatively related depositional texture characteristics such as size, sorting and packing to the porosity and permeability of the microbialites from the Santos Basin, corroborating the importance of the depositional process on primary porosity. On the other hand, Herlinger et al. 2017 characterized the complex diagenetic pathways of the pre-salt carbonates from the Campos Basin and their impact on permeability and porosity, indicating that diagenesis is capable of changing potential primary reservoirs into poor quality reservoirs or non-reservoirs. 13 In this context, the purpose of this study is to present new data and interpretations on the lacustrine carbonate reservoirs of the Aptian Barra Velha Formation from the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. To do so, an integrated stratigraphic, sedimentological and petrophysical study of a target core interval was carried out, seeking to understand how the depositional framework evolved and how the post-depositional process affected the poroperm systems. This work presents qualitative and quantitative analysis regarding the main presalt sag phase facies that are common in many oilfields in the South Atlantic Basins and our intention is for this work to contribute to general knowledge on lacustrine carbonate reservoirs. Geological setting The Santos Basin is a passive-margin basin located in the southeastern part of the Brazilian continental margin, covering a total area of c. 350,000 km2 between the states of Rio de Janeiro and Santa Catarina. It is bounded in the NE by the Cabo Frio High, and in the SW by the Florianopolis Platform, defining its borders with the Campos and Pelotas Basins, respectively Fig. 1 Moreira et al. 2007 . The basin was formed under an extensional tectonic regime during the rupture of the Gondwana supercontinent in the Late Jurassic-Early Cretaceous, which led to the separation of South America and Africa and the opening of the South Atlantic Ocean Chang et al. 1992 Cainelli and Mohriak 1999 Mohriak et al. 2008 . The break-up of western Gondwana took nearly 40 million years, from the early Valanginian to the late Albian Szatmari 2000 . The basin-fill history of the Santos Basin can be subdivided into three megasequences 1 rift -138 123 My 2 post-rift sag -123 113 My and 3 drift -113 0 My Moreira et al. 2007 Fig. 2 . Initially, the weakened and thin continental crust was strongly affected by tensional fractures that later became conduits for magma Herz 1977 , the intense volcanism characterized by the Camboriu Formation basalts mark the beginning of the rift phase and development of the economic basement of the Santos Basin Chang et al. 1992 Mohriak et al. 2008 . With the gradual evolution of the rift system, the Camboriu Formation was overlain by the fluvio-lacustrine deposits of the Pic arras and Itapema Formations, which are dominated by sandstones, siltstones and shales of talc-stevensitic composition and coquinas interlayered with shales, respectively Moreira et al. 2007 . Thermal contraction of the crust resulted in the subsidence and collapse of crustal domes, generating sag-type basins Beasley et al. 2010 . The post-rift sag interval is composed of the lacustrine deposits of the Barra Velha Formation, which are the focus of this work. In the studied International Journal of Earth Sciences Fig. 1 General overview of the main Brazilian sedimentary basins left and zoom in the Santos Basin right showing the polygon blue line that delimitates the pre-salt occurrences and licensed areas green , offshore SW Brazil Fig. 2 Cretaceous stratigraphy for the Santos Basin highlighting the salt-sealed Barra Velha Formation modified from Moreira et al. 2007 area, the Barra Velha Formation is approximately 300 m thick and its top occurs below the 5000 m depth mark. The Barra Velha Formation carbonates were interpreted as a transition between shallow marine and continental environments, where stromatolites and microbialites were deposited Moreira et al. 2007 Terra et al. 2010 Mann and Rigg 2012 . Recently, Wright and Barnett 2015 proposed that these carbonates have an abiotic-dominated origin 13 International Journal of Earth Sciences associated to highly saturated and alkaline lacustrine waters. The formation is bordered at its base by the Pre-Alagoas unconformity, separating the microbialite lake system from the older bivalve coquina-dominated lakes. At the top, the formation is overlain by transitional evaporites of the Ariri Formation Moreira et al. 2007 Mohriak et al. 2008 Quirk et al. 2013 . The Ariri Formation evaporites were deposited in a paleogeographic scenario similar to a gulf with highly saline waters and negative hydrological balance Chang et al. 1992 . The evaporite interval has a highly variable thickness due to halokinesis, but may be as thick as 2 km, and it is composed of a lower layer of anhydrite overlain by halite and other salt minerals creating a regional seal Moreira et al. 2007 Beasley et al. 2010 . Exploration targets in the strata above the evaporites are commonly referred to as post-salt, or suprasalt prospects, and the ones below are called pre-salt. The post-salt deposits occurred during the drift phase, which is characterized by the development of a passive margin and represents the definitive establishment of marine settings, comprising the Camburi, Frade and Itamambuca Groups Moreira et al. 2007 . RES 40 m equipment at the Laboratory of Porous Media and Thermophysical Properties of the Federal University of Santa Catarina LMPT UFSC . After the acquisition of the two-dimensional data cross-sections , the three-dimensional models were created by stacking these sections in the PerGeos software, where the images were also binarized for the determination and quantification of the porous phase. The nuclear magnetic resonance NMR analysis was carried out in a GeoSpec 2-53 Maran DRX HF 2.24 MHz equipment, by Oxford Instruments at CEPETRO UNICAMP, all samples were saturated with deionized water. In order to define the T2 transverse relaxation time cutoff that separates the FFI free fluid index and BVI Bulk volume irreducible areas, the centrifuge method was used. The 100 saturated samples were centrifuged air water to determine the irreducible water saturation Swir . After centrifugation, the samples underwent a new NMR measurement, thus obtaining the Swir curve for each sample. Methods The studied core interval of the Barra Velha Formation was grouped into 6 depositional facies F1 F6 Fig. 3 1 shrubby framestones 2 intraclastic grainstones rudstones 3 spherulitic packstones grainstones and hybrid forms 4 laminated dolomudstones 5 shrubby framestones and hybrid forms and 6 spherulitic grainstones intercalated with shrubby framestones. Each facies is formed by different associations of five key textural components 1 crystal shrubs 2 calcite spherulites 3 hybrid forms 4 mudgrade carbonates and dolomite and 5 intraclasts. Facies dominated by crystal shrubs, spherulites and hybrid forms F1, F3, F5 and F6 are the most recurrent, comprising about 80 of the entire interval. These facies are generally characterized by autochthonous deposits, with subordinated occurrences of transported sediments. Facies dominated by reworked grains, mainly intraclasts F2 , correspond to approximately 15 of the total, and dolomudstones with minor clay content add up to 5 of the total. The identified depositional facies are described below. This study is based on c. 8 m of core samples, 30 petrographic thin sections and 11 plugs of a vertical well herein named SB-A1, comprising the Barra Velha Formation from the Santos Basin. Restrictions placed by one partner company preclude the disclosure of depths, well names and oil fields. The applied methods include optical petrography plane-polarized light PL crossed-polarized light XPL , petrographic image analysis, X-ray computed tomography CT-scan , nuclear magnetic resonance NMR and conventional poroperm gas tests. The petrographic image analysis was performed on thin section high-definition images obtained from a transmitted light scanner with 6400 dpi resolution. The analyzed thin sections were stained with an acid solution of alizarin red for calcite dolomite differentiation and impregnated with blue epoxy resin to improve the porous space characterization. The scan images were binarized, which enabled the separation of the porous blue epoxy resin and non-porous space matrix, grains and cement through RGB curves. The binarization and segmentation process was performed with the PerGeos software v. 1.5 . CT-scan data acquisition of core samples was performed on a Siemens industrial tomography device, model SWFVD30C RES 100 m at the Center for Petroleum Studies of the University of Campinas CEPETRO UNICAMP . In addition, high-resolution CT images from plugs were acquired in a ZEISS XRadia Versa XRM-500 Scanner 13 Results Sag depositional facies Shrubby framestones F1 The shrubby framestones facies occur in beds with an average thickness of c. 0.9 m, consisting of millimeter-tocentimeter thick layers of in situ crystal shrub crusts, with secondary concentrations of spherulites, intraclasts and phosphatic bioclasts. The shrub-like growths are the main textural components of this facies and they are characterized by non-magnesian fibrous-radial calcite crystals, with International Journal of Earth Sciences Fig. 3 Schematic stratigraphic column of the SB-A1 well showing facies succession and the main textural components GR gamma ray log upward bifurcating dendritic patterns Fig. 4a e . These calcite shrubs are morphologically similar to the crystal shrubs Chafetz and Guidry 1999 , defined as shrub-like forms that morphologically display a strong influence of crystal habit . The crystal shrubs coalesce both vertically and horizontally, creating crusts with interstitial space variably affected by cementation. The crystal shrubs vary significantly in terms of size, packing and morphology. Individual shrubs range in size from 1 to 20 mm, but bigger dendritic structures consisting of several coalesced shrubs may reach 5 cm. The length width L W ratio is usually between 1 and 2 and the dominant macro- and micromorphologies Claes et al. 2017 are arborescent-to-dendriform and fan-to-dendritic, respectively Fig. 4c, d . Shrubs with more prominent horizontal development L W ratios lower than 1 are rare. In general, well-developed shrubs present high L W ratios, complex branching patterns and dendriform morphology, creating complex fabrics with the potential for high primary porosity. Packing may vary from shrubs spaced c. 5 mm apart to high density crusts with small interstitial porosity and sutured contacts. 13 International Journal of Earth Sciences 13 International Journal of Earth Sciences Fig. 4 Aspects of the shrubby framestones facies a core photograph highlighting dendritic crystal shrubs white arrows . b Thin section scan image showing calcite crystal shrubs among dolomitic and quartz cement light beige and white, respectively and pore space blue PL . c, d Photomicrograph of a typical crystal shrub dotted area in b with high L W ratio 2 , surrounded by dolomite rhombs, quartz and partially preserved growth framework pores PL and XPL, respectively . e Photomicrograph of the different pore types associated with shrubs, growth framework porosity green arrows , disseminated intra-shrub microporosity red arrow and microfracture orange arrow PL . f Photomicrograph of growth framework pore obliterated by dolomite and quartz cementation XPL The most common porosity occurs as growth framework pores among crystal shrubs and their branches Fig. 4e . Intraparticle intra-shrub porosity created by calcite dissolution occurs as micropores, irregularly disseminate through the shrub, or can be oriented by internal structures, following growth bands and radial crystals Fig. 4e . Finally, irregular microfractures may also occur, although they are not as common as the other types of porosity Fig. 4e . In most cases c. 75 of the thin sections , the primary growth framework porosity is partially filled by dolomite and silica cement Fig. 4b d, f , the main diagenetic constituents of these deposits. Dolomite occurs as rhombohedral crystals with variable intercrystalline porosity or as isopachous crystals around the calcite fabric. Dolomitic cement varies in abundance, from nearly absent to pore-obliterating mosaics. Silica occurs as prismatic coarse quartz, microporous microcrystalline quartz and fibrous chalcedony, different silica varieties may occur concomitantly in the same pore space. Pervasive silicification and dolomitization partially replace the calcite fabric in certain restricted intervals that are usually associated to low porosity. Intraclastic grainstones and rudstones F2 Intraclastic grainstones rudstones occur in a single 1.10 m thick interval and are characterized by calcitic detrital grains Fig. 5 , commonly interlayered with thin levels of crystal shrub crusts. This facies is generally grain-supported c. 85 of the thin sections and composed of coarse sand to pebble-grade reworked fragments of crystal shrub crusts, spherulites, dolomudstones, silicified particles, phosphatic bioclasts and pisoids. The fabric is characterized by poor size sorting, tight packing and significant grain shape diversity, ranging from spherical and well-rounded to irregular and very angular grains Fig. 5a e . In general, coarser intraclasts present preserved internal structure such as radial and fascicular crystal habit of spherulites and shrubs, which are usually unclear in the fine-grained sediments. Some spherical-to-elliptical grains also present well-defined concentric internal laminations and resemble pisoids Fig. 5b, c . Phosphatic bioclasts Fig. 5f are also common and occur in small amounts, usually less than 3 fragments per thin section. These fragments consist of apatite and occur as elongate fragments up to 10 mm or as irregular particles resembling skeletal elements. Most of the bioclastic fragments were affected by micritization and fracturing due to compaction. The primary depositional texture of F2 facies was mainly affected by silicification and dolomite cementation that obstructed most of the primary interparticle porosity in the majority of the analyzed thin sections, both processes seem to be more intense in this facies than in the shrubby framestones. In addition, the intraclasts were strongly affected by internal dissolution and developed high intraparticle porosity. One thin-section shows evidence of strong matrix dissolution resulting in extreme porosity Fig. 5e , corresponding to a restricted 3 cm porous layer in the core. Open fractures occur in low spatial density. Spherulitic packstones grainstones and hybrid forms F3 Spherulitic packstones and grainstones facies occur in beds 30 80 cm thick, consisting of millimeter-to-centimeter thick layers of spherulites intercalated or in gradational pattern to transitional grain types between shrubs and spherulites, here called hybrid forms Fig. 6 . Carbonate spherulites are defined as spherical-to-elliptical grains composed of a radiating array of either calcite or aragonite crystals Chafetz et al. 2018 . The calcite spherulites present a diameter ranging from 0.1 to 2 mm and are easily recognized under crossed-polarized light by the dark cross-shaped radial figure Fig. 6d, h . It is common for spherulites to present small micritic or microsparitic nuclei, which are frequently dissolved leaving a moldic void Fig. 6h . Some spherulites show evidence of transport and reworking, such as fragmentation and fracturing, whereas others seem to have grown in situ, with good morphology preservation and good size sorting. The hybrid forms were previously described by Saller et al. 2016 as transitional grains between spherulites and crystal shrubs. These hybrid grains have characteristics of both shrubs and spherulites, featuring spherical bases associated to asymmetric cross-shaped figures under crossedpolarized light, and are elongate perpendicular to the bedding with variable branching levels Fig. 6e, f . The hybrid forms range from asymmetric spherulites to well-developed and branched structures up to 4 mm in length. The spherulites and hybrid forms occur as grainstones and packstones with interparticle porosity variably affected by cementation and dissolution. Similar to the previously described facies, dolomite and silica are the main types of cement Fig. 6c f , pervasive dolomitization is relatively common and may destroy the spherulites original morphology and obliterate primary porosity Fig. 6g . In addition, burial compaction reduced the interparticle porosity and 13 International Journal of Earth Sciences Fig. 5 Aspects of the intraclastic grainstones and rudstones facies a core photograph of poorly-sorted calcite detrital grains, manly intraclasts and pisoids. b Thin section scan image highlighting intraclasts red arrows and possible pisoids green arrows , with low interparticle porosity PL . c Magnification of the region c shown in b, highlighting a possible pisoid with concentric internal laminations green arrows . d Magnification of the region d shown in b, showing cal- cite intraclasts of various shapes, with interparticle porosity partially filled by dolomite and quartz cement PL . e Angular intraclasts of dolomudstone yellow arrow , silicified particles red arrow and fragmented spherulites green arrows XPL , the matrix was partially dissolved creating high secondary porosity. f Micriticised and fractured phosphatic bioclasts green arrows PL resulted in spherulites sutured by microstylolites and coalesced fused grains Fig. 6c . Intraparticle porosity is related to internal dissolution patterns that generally follow the radially disposed calcite crystals Fig. 6h , although this is not as frequent as that observed in intraclastic grains. Laminated dolomudstones F4 13 The laminated dolomudstones facies occurs as thin beds 30 cm , characterized by very fine texture and irregular submillimeter-to-millimeter thick laminations Fig. 7 . The International Journal of Earth Sciences fabric consists of mud-grade carbonate debris with occasional calcite particles up to 0.5 mm in size, blocky dolomite crystals, usually smaller than 0.1 mm in size and common phosphatic bioclasts. Silicification is the most striking feature of this facies and occurs in the form of abundant silica layers and nodules Fig. 7a, b, d , which may be as extensive as the core diameter. Silica occurs mainly as microcrystalline quartz or chalcedony and may present high microporosity. The porous system of these dolomudstones is characterized by small intercrystalline and interparticle porosity, possibly enhanced by dissolution Fig. 7c . Fracture porosity is also commonly associated with this facies, as a significant amount of irregular and continuous fractures, with apertures varying from 0.1 to 0.5 mm, occur. Some of those fractures are partially or completely filled by silica and opaque heavy minerals. Shrubby framestones and hybrid forms F5 The shrubby framestones and hybrid form facies occur in a single interval c. 70 cm thick, and it is characterized by centimeter thick layers of crystal shrubs and well-developed hybrid forms, with subordinated spherulite occurrences. This facies differs from facies 1 and 3 by the abundance and development level of the hybrid forms greater L W ratio and branching degree , possibly constituting an intermediate occurrence between these two facies. The diagenetic modifications are similar to facies 1 and 3, dolomite and silica cementation partially fill the primary growth framework pore space. Spherulitic grainstones intercalated with shrubby framestones F6 High frequency intercalation of millimeter-to-centimeter thick layers of spherulitic grainstones and shrubby framestones occur in a single interval, c. 95 cm thick. The occurrences of crystal shrubs and spherulites in this facies repeat the same textural features of previous occurrences F1 and F3 , with well-developed dendritic shrubs and spherical in situ spherulites. Dolomitic and silica cementation and dissolution processes vary in amount from layer-to-layer, affecting primary growth framework and interparticle porosity. Petrophysics Petrographic image analysis Petrographic image analysis was applied to 30 petrographic thin sections in order to estimate porosity and to provide initial data on pore type and pore size distribution. Table 1 presents the average porosity and the main pore types for the different textural components and diagenetic conditions. The overall porosity ranges between 0.05 and 42.8 average 6.54 , standard deviation 2.86 . Samples dominated by crystal shrub crusts, hybrid forms, and calcite spherulites with preserved or enhanced growth framework and interparticle pores, respectively, present the highest porosities 5 20 . Thin sections showing crystal shrubs, hybrid forms and spherulites strongly affected by cementation and mud-size carbonate, present the lowest porosity 5 . Samples of intraclastic composition in general, present intermediate porosity values 1 10 with the exception of an anomalous sample of 42.8 porosity associated to an extreme dissolution process Fig. 5e . Four common relationships between the main fabrics of the studied interval and different pore systems are illustrated in Fig. 8. Shrubby framestones samples with high growth framework porosity and spherulitic grainstones with enhanced interparticle pores present the highest pore area range, with pores larger than 1 mm2. As displayed in Fig. 8a, b by crystal shrub and spherulite samples, pores larger than 0.01 mm2 represent less than 1 10 of the total number of pores but correspond to 63 and 80.9 of the total porosity, respectively. The majority of the intraclastic grainstones rudstones samples presented intense cementation by dolomite and silica and although they may also present millimeter-scale pores, tend to be dominated by small area intraparticle pores. As can be observed from the sample shown in Fig. 8c, porosity is mainly limited within the intraclastic grains and the pore area analysis indicates that pores smaller than 0.01 mm2 add most of the porosity 63.3 . Mud-grade carbonates and dolomite samples associated to dolomudstone facies presented low porosity dominated by very small area interparticle and intercrystalline pores, in the sample presented in Fig. 8d, pore areas smaller than 0.01 mm2 correspond to 78.8 of the total porosity. Core samples CT scan A representative 1.3 m core subinterval, featuring the main facies and textural components of the studied interval, was chosen for a continuous CT-scan data acquisition Fig. 9 . The CT-scan data enabled us not only to segment and calculate porosity, but also to improve the sedimentological characterization. However, due to the resolution of the CT-scan device, the pore size recognition was limited to pores larger than 100 m, certainly underestimating the total porosity. As shown by petrographic image analysis, pore systems of intervals dominated by intraparticle, intercrystalline and small interparticle growth framework pores were probably not detected by the CT-scan data acquisition. The detected macroporosity ranges between almost null to c. 8 , and its vertical profile is characterized by high porosity peaks, that are a few centimeters thick, intercalated 13 International Journal of Earth Sciences 13 International Journal of Earth Sciences Fig. 6 Aspects of the spherulitic packstones grainstones and hybrid form facies. a Core photograph of a spherulite-rich bed. b Thin section scan image showing millimeter-size calcite spherulites alizarin red with interparticle porosity blue partially filled by dolomite light beige XPL . c, d Photomicrograph of coalesced spherulites with interparticle porosity partially obstructed by quartz and dolomite cement green arrow , spherulites show evidence of pressure dissolution microstylolites red arrows PL, XPL . e, f Photomicrograph showing the typical morphology of hybrid forms, characterized by spherical base and longitudinal growth red arrow , the interparticle space is partially filled by dolomite and chalcedony PL, XPL . g Photomicrograph of dolomitized spherulite dotted orange line XPL . h Photomicrograph of a partially dissolved spherulite, intraparticle porosity follows radial calcite crystals green arrow and dissolved nucleus red arrow XPL with low porosity zones. Although the porosity peaks are mainly associated with the specific lithological-related porous systems such as the shrubby framestones dominated by high growth framework porosity and intraclastic rudstones characterized by interparticle porosity the porosity profile poorly corresponds to the lithological variations. This behavior is expected to be related to intervals particularly affected by dolomite and silica cementation. Due to differences in mass density and atomic number of the composed silica and carbonate minerals, they present different X-ray attenuation coefficients. For most of the X-ray energy spectrum, quartz is substantially less attenuating than calcite, resulting in darker gray values in the tomography image Vlassenbroeck et al. 2007 Saur et al. 2020 . Centimeter-size irregular and pervasive silica layers and nodules can be recognized throughout the entire interval and are associated to null or low macroporosity zones. In addition, the CT-data enabled the clear identification of high-density, heavy minerals highly attenuating which appear as bright spots in the tomography image. The occurrence of heavy minerals is mainly associated to dolomudstones F4 and intraclastic grainstone rudstones F2 , and as crystals filling fractures along with silica or associated to silicified layers. High resolution CT scan and NMR High-resolution CT-scan, NMR and conventional gas tests were applied to eleven 40 mm-diameter plugs that represent the main depositional facies and textural components of the studied interval. The results are listed in Table 2 and illustrated in Fig. 10. Gas tests and NMR porosity measurements are close and as expected, highlight the high heterogeneity of the reservoir, the porosity values range from 2.69 to 26.32 and 2.36 to 21.21 , respectively. The highest poroperm values are associated with samples dominated by crystal shrubs Bp2, Bp4, Bp11 and calcite spherulites affected by matrix dissolution Bp5 . The porosity estimated by high-resolution CT-scan data segmentation diverges in relation to gas injection and NMR results, with values 55.5 99.6 lower, ranging from 0.01 to 11.7 . Even with a higher resolution 40 m than the conventional CT-scan 100 m applied to core samples, the CT-scan of plugs was still unable to detect a significant amount of the pore volume. As evidenced by the irreducible water saturation analysis SWI , samples such as Bp1, Bp6, Bp7 and Bp9 are dominated by microporosity generally 4 m , which is far below the tomography resolution resulting in segmented porosity values close to zero. In addition, all samples, except Bp11 and Bp5, presented zero pore connectivity in the CT data. Although porosity recognition was partial, CT-scan data revealed important information on fabric characteristics and macroporosity distribution Fig. 11 . Pore volume distribution followed similar patterns for crystal shrubs and reworked spherulites Fig. 11a c as observed in the petrographic image analysis Fig. 8a, b with larger pores 0.01 mm3 dominating total porosity. The total porosity of samples constituted of intraclasts also appears to be dominated by large volume pores Fig. 11e however, small intraparticle pores, commonly associated with this lithology Fig. 8c , were not detected by CT-scan segmentation and the darker grey shades lower density of these grains indicates the presence of abundant internal porosity. Although sample Bp10 presents moderately high porosity gas 17.48 NMR 12.46 , the sample is characterized by low permeability k 0.0093 mD , which is possibly associated with the cementation process that isolated interparticle pores between intraclasts. Textural components and even diagenetic features were significantly better defined in high-resolution CT-scan. The absence of porosity observed in core CT-scan of facies F3 Fig. 9 was also registered in the high-resolution CT-scan of sample Bp9 Fig. 11d . The plug sample was affected by pervasive silicification dark grey in tomography image that almost obliterated interparticle pores and possibly replaced the matrix, resulting in spherulites and hybrid forms floating in silica cement. In this sample, the detected porosity 0.01 is mostly made up of isolated small intraparticle pores. In contrast, sample Bp5, also constituted of spherulites but rather reworked and associated with intense matrix dissolution, presented the highest poroperm values gas 26.32 NMR 21.21 k 1436.33 mD . This sample is characterized by unobstructed and highly connected interparticle pores similar to those observed in poorly cemented oolitic grainstones. In this sample, 90 of the segmented porosity is connected in both vertical and horizontal directions. Another interesting aspect that high-resolution CT-scan revealed is the effect of high frequency intercalation of porous shrub layers and fine detrital grains and dolomite 13 International Journal of Earth Sciences Fig. 7 Aspects of laminated dolomudstones facies a core photograph of irregularly laminated carbonates highlighting silica nodules red arrows . b Thin section scan image showing partially silicified mudgrade carbonates scan, PL . c Magnification of the dotted region c in b, showing a level with concentrated mud and high porosity green arrow PL . d Magnification of the dotted region d in b, showing a silica nodule composed of micro and macrocrystalline quartz XPL Table 1 Porosity calculated by thin section image analysis and the main pore types associated with the different textural components Dominant textural components Main occurrence facies Average porosity Main pore types Cemented crystal shrub crusts Open dissolved crystal shrub crusts Cemented calcite spherulites Open dissolved calcite spherulites Cemented intraclasts Open dissolved intraclasts Cemented hybrid forms Open dissolved hybrid forms Mud-grade carbonate and dolomite F6, F1 F1 F3, F6 F3, F6 F2 F2 F5, F3 F5, F3 F4 3.1 10.1 0.3 13.6 2.5 25.2 0.1 3.2 0.8 Fig. 11a, b . Layers of fine detrital grains and dolomudstones tend to present very low porosity and are easily identified by high concentrations of opaque heavy minerals. These layers may create flow barriers obstructing the connection between different generations of vertically 13 Intercrystalline, intra-shrub, growth framework Growth framework, intercrystalline, intra-shrub Intercrystalline, intraparticle, interparticle Interparticle, intercrystalline intraparticle, vug Intraparticle, intercrystalline interparticle Interparticle, intercrystalline, intraparticle, vug Intercrystalline, growth framework Growth framework, intercrystalline Intercrystalline, small interparticle, fracture elongate cylindrical pores, associated to growth framework pore systems of crystal shrubs. These characteristics can explain, for example, why the growth framework porosity of sample Bp1 gas 7.46 NMR 7.59 is associated to an almost null vertical permeability k 0.0009 mD . International Journal of Earth Sciences Fig. 8 Pore area histograms of four representative thin sections consisting of crystal shrubs facies F1 a , spherulites facies F3 b , intraclasts and pisoids facies F2 c and partially silicified dolomud- stone facies F4 d , calculated by petrographic image analysis. Above the histograms are the thin section scan images left and the binarized in-put right Discussion correlated Santos Terra et al. 2010 Wright and Barnett 2015 , Campos Dias 2005 Ceraldi and Green 2016 Herlinger et al. 2017 and Kwanza Basins Saller et al. 2016 Ceraldi and Green 2016 Table 3 . Although similar lithologies and facies have been described and associated to a volcanic-sourced alkaline lake, significantly different interpretations for their origins and depositional settings have Sag interval geology Most of the textural components and facies described in the studied sag interval of the Santos Basin resemble facies previously described by several authors in the genetically 13 International Journal of Earth Sciences Fig. 9 CT-scan analysis of a representative core interval from the well SB-A1, showing the relationship between geological characteristics and the porosity profile generated by the segmentation of the pore phase. GFP growth framework porosity, FP fracture porosity, IP interparticle porosity been proposed. The origin and evolution of the main constituents of the sag interval is discussed below. possibly associated with microbial activity another argument is that the shrubs present vertical growth and the ability to create depositional highs, similar to modern coral and algal reefs. Ceraldi and Green 2016 also interpret that the upright-to-inclined growth patterns of the shrubs from the Kwanza and Campos Basins suggest a response to sun light or current energy. In contrast, Wright and Barnett 2015 and Herlinger et al. 2017 while not excluding the microbial activity, defend the predominance of abiotic chemical precipitation processes. Wright and Barnett 2015 argue that the evidence of microbial activity is rare and inconclusive in the Santos Basin and, as highlighted by Herlinger et al. 2017 , for the Campos Basin, the continuous fibrous Origin of the shrubby framestones Among the South-Atlantic pre-salt sag-phase facies, perhaps the most striking and controversial are the shrub-dominated lithologies. These unusual shrub-like, autochthonous carbonate features have been a source of major scientific debate, mainly focused on their formation and bioticity. Saller et al. 2016 argue that the shrubs from the pre-salt section of the Kwanza Basin have a microbial origin, as micritization and erosion embayments were identified in the shrubs and are 13 International Journal of Earth Sciences Table 2 Summary of the petrophysical analysis of the plug samples from the Barra Velha Formation Sample Dominant textural components Depositional facies Gas porosity Gas permeability mD NMR porosity SWI microporosity MicroCT porosity Z axis connectivity microCT X axis connectivity microCT Bp1 Crystal shrubs intercalated with hybrid forms and fine detrital grains Well-developed crystal shrubs Small-developed crystal shrubs Well-developed crystal shrubs Reworked calcite spherulites Intraclasts Crystal shrubs Poorly-developed crystal shrubs and mud-grade carbonates Calcite spherulites and hybrid forms Intraclasts Well-developed crystal shrubs F5 7.46 0.0009 7.59 71.9 0.3 0 0 F1 14.06 4.2955 12.22 37.3 3.19 0 0 F1 12.43 0.0214 11.05 36.9 2.5 0 0 F1 16.93 25.19 14.68 29.5 1.9 0 0 F3 26.32 1436.33 21.21 19.6 11.7 10.53 10.53 F2 F6 F4 4.5 2.8 0.74 0.0018 0.0007 0.0012 6.95 3.03 2.34 70.4 92.1 n a 0.2 0.01 0.8 0 0 0 0 0 0 F3 2.69 0.0131 2.36 87.6 0.01 0 0 F2 F1 17.48 17.44 0.0093 5.199 12.63 15.74 n a 30.6 6.36 5.82 0 0 0 2.68 Bp2 Bp3 Bp4 Bp5 Bp6 Bp7 Bp8 Bp9 Bp10 Bp11 Fig. 10 Correlation between permeability in logarithmic scale measured by conventional laboratory gas test and porosity measured by gas test, nuclear magnetic resonance and highresolution computed tomography segmentation. The three porosity measurement methods indicate that a wide variation of porosity may occur for samples constituted of the same textural components, this behavior is an effect of post-depositional changes. The uniformly lower porosity values inferred from micro CT analysis are a result of the resolution limit of the method crystal fabric is a strong argument in favor of abiotic mineral precipitation. The shrub-like precipitates analyzed in this work show no clear textural evidence of microbial activity. Textures related to typical microbialites Burne and Moore 1987 Riding 1991, 2011a, b such as those resembling grain trapping and binding processes were not identified neither were they clotted, micropeloidal or microporous micritic textures. Direct microbial evidence such as microfossils, cyanobacterial filaments, cemented biofilms and organic material are also absent. However, we are aware of the limited sample size investigated in this study and the complexity of this subject, which demands further investigation of such fabrics. As pointed out by Bastianini et al. 2019 the absence of microbial texture does not directly imply that there is no microbial influence on precipitation, as the simple presence of polar 13 International Journal of Earth Sciences 13 International Journal of Earth Sciences Fig. 11 High-resolution CT-scan 3D volumes, segmented porosity pores displayed by color , and pore volume histograms of the plug samples from the Barra Velha Formation. a Well-developed crystal shrubs F1 . b Crystal shrubs and hybrid forms intercalated with fine detrital grains F5 . c Reworked calcite spherulites F3 . d Silicified calcite spherulites and hybrid forms F3 . e Partially cemented intraclasts F2 organic molecules and EPS may enhance dendrite growth. Conversely, biota present during crystal growth does not necessarily imply that it affects crystal growth Folk et al. 1985 Pentecost and Coletta 2007 Rainey and Jones 2009 . The carbonate shrubs analyzed in this work were classified as crystal shrubs Chafetz and Guidry 1999 , dominated by abiotic mineral precipitation, mainly due to the distinct crystal habits and regular repeating morphologies, contrasting with what would be expected for complete bacterial shrubs, which tend to exhibit irregular morphologies composed of micritic aggregates related to the bacterial clumps Fig. 12 . Typical examples of bacterial shrubs from analogous travertine systems can be found in Chafetz and Guidry 1999 , Claes et al. 2017 and Erthal et al. 2017 . Shrubby fabrics in pre-salt deposits are widely regarded as being formed in very saline-to-alkaline environments, but interpretations and models differ in relation to the dominant control factors on the distribution of facies between oscillations in bathymetry, accommodation space and environmental energy Saller et al. 2016 Ceraldi and Green 2016 , geochemistry and evaporation-refilling cycles Wright and Barnett 2015 Wright and Tosca 2016 Ceraldi and Green 2016 and hydrogeochemistry, focusing on the type of water sourcing the lake and the leakage to aquifers MercedesMarti n et al. 2019 . Here we interpreted the shrub-dominated facies F1 and F5 to be formed during lowstand, shallow and highly saturated waters associated to a moderate-to-high energy environment Fig. 13b . Several studies on calcite shrub morphology indicate that hydrodynamic conditions and flow energy play an important role on shrub morphology development Pentecost and Viles 1994 Rainey and Jones 2009 Okumura et al. 2012 Erthal et al. 2017 . According to studies performed by Erthal et al. 2017 on shrubby-abundant travertines, the increase of the flow rates enhances precipitation rates, decreases microbial influence and develop denser and more complex morphologies. In addition, the stratigraphic proximity and sometimes interlayering between crystal shrubs and coarse intraclastic grains, reinforces the idea of energetic shallow conditions. Formation of calcite spherulites According to Saller et al. 2016 , in the sag section of the Kwanza Basin, there is no clear separation between the precipitation of depositional carbonates and the early diagenetic features. These circumstances seem to be recurrent in many pre-salt formations. Herlinger et al. 2017 found petrographic evidence that calcite spherulites from the Campos Basin are an eogenetic constituent replacing and displacing the original unconsolidated sediment or gel. Whereas Saller et al. 2016 consider spherulites, as well as shrubs, to be depositional precipitates. The Barra Velha Formation spherulites have been interpreted to form and nucleate inside unconsolidated muddy sediments or gels in a hyper-alkaline environment Tosca and Wright 2015 Wright and Barnett 2015 . According to Wright and Barnett 2015 when there was a rapid deposition of a Mg silicate gel talc-stevensite precursor the substrate was unsuitable for shrub growth and favored the nucleation of spherulites inside the gel. In addition, the formation of insitu spherulites would probably require water that was deep enough to have limited current agitation Saller et al. 2016 . According to the model proposed by Chafetz et al. 2018 , for the Brazilian pre-salt spherulites, these allochems formed around fine-grained micritic nuclei, possibly microbialrelated, in the water column Fig. 13d . The micritic core is then enveloped by calcite seed crystals by microbialinduced precipitation and settles at the bottom of the lake. The presence of the seed crystal facilitates the growth of abiotic cortices in the sediment water interface. This model justifies the presence of the nucleus in most spherulites in the studied interval and the well-developed crystal habits of the spherulite cortices. Formation of hybrid forms Facies 3 and 5 present morphologically intermediate forms between spherulites and crystal shrubs. According to Saller et al. 2016 , the morphology of the calcite precipitate is a function of depositional energy, degree of supersaturation and substrate. Therefore, the hybrid forms may be formed in transitional environments time and space between those required for the formation of spherulites and shrubs Fig. 13c . Asymmetrical spherulite growth was probably facilitated by the proximity to the sediment water interface associated with moderate-to-low Mg silicate precipitation rates in a more energetic environment than the one associated to spherulite nucleation. These settings allowed the spherulites to grow into the water column and develop dendritic morphological patterns. Genesis of the detrital facies Intraclastic grainstones and rudstones in the sag phase of the Campos and Kwanza Basins have been interpreted as being formed in shallow and high energy environments Saller et al. 2016 Ceraldi and Green 2016 . During lowstand, older deposits were reworked and transported by relatively strong 13 International Journal of Earth Sciences Table 3 Comparison between interpreted facies in this study and facies described by other authors in pre-salt formations from the Santos, Campos and Kwanza Basins Interpreted facies Wright and Barnett 2015 Saller et al. 2016 Herlinger et al. 2017 Shrubby framestones F1 Spherulitic packstones grainstones and hybrid forms F3 Laminated dolomudstones F4 Shrubby framestones and hybrid forms F5 , spherulitic packstonesgrainstones and hybrid forms F3 Intraclastic grainstones and rudstones F2 Facies 1 in situ shrubs Facies 2 spherulite-dominated lithologies Shrubby boundstones Spherulite wackestonespackstones Fascicular calcite crusts Microbialites shrubs Stevensitic claystones with Spherulite-stevensite calcite spherulites wackestones packstones Facies 3 laminated detrital Micritic limestone mudlimestones stone-wackestone Intermediate hybrid facies Intraclastic grainstones rudstones Layered spheruliteintraclast-packstonesgrainstones Ceraldi and Green 2016 Argillaceous-spherulite mudstones Intraclast grainstones Fig. 12 The continuous spectrum between microbial induced controlled precipitation and abiotic mineral precipitation and shrub types according to Chafetz and Guidry 1999 . The Barra Velha Formation shrubs were interpreted to be somewhere within the crystal shrubs domain, formed by fibrous calcite crystals flows that were capable of transporting grains even larger than 1 cm across Fig. 13a . The poor size- and morphology sorting, including the presence of very angular grains also indicates non-selective short transportation. Another possibility is that these abundant reworked sediments were related to local tectonism and small-scale syn-depositional faulting that could indicate the presence of fan-delta facies Wright and Rodriguez 2018 . These settings could promote exposure and extensive erosion of older deposits and the deposition of coarse intraclastic grainstones rudstones deposits. In contrast, the laminated dolomudstones facies are the finest products of reworking and are probably associated with deeper and low energy environments Fig. 13e . The presence of pre-compaction silica nodules and phosphatic bioclasts can be interpreted as evidence for a drop in pH 13 International Journal of Earth Sciences Fig. 13 Schematic evolution model for the main fabrics observed in the analyzed core interval of the Barra Velha Formation. The model compiles ideas and elements from several studies on the South Atlantic pre-salt sag phase carbonates, including Wright and Barnett 2015, 2017 , Wright and Rodriguez 2018 , Ceraldi and Green 2016 , Saller et al. 2016 and Chafetz et al. 2018 13 International Journal of Earth Sciences triggered by the lake water freshening Wright and Barnett 2015 Wright and Rodriguez 2018 . Dolomite and silicification Herlinger et al. 2017 considers five main patterns for dolomite precipitation in the sag section of the Campos Basin 1 early dolomite that grew inside the unconsolidated sediment 2 mimetic replacement of stevensite lamination 3 pore filling cement 4 pervasive replacement of the rock and 5 saddle dolomite associated to fracturing. Saller et al. 2016 also identified patterns 3 and 4 in the sag section of the Kwanza Basin, and suggested the occurrence of primary crystalline dolomite precipitated directly from the lake water. In the studied interval, the main occurrence of dolomite is as pore-filling cement, partially or totally obliterating the primary porosity and or dissolution-related pores. In addition, dolomite also occurs as a partial replacement of the calcitic fabric dolomitization , which is mainly associated to thin and highly cemented intervals. Dolomite bridges , as those identified by Wright and Barnett 2015, 2017 as the mimetic replacement of clay matrices, such as stevensite, are rare and uncertain in the analyzed interval as well as the occurrence of stevensite itself. Although stevensite is an abundant constituent of the pre-salt deposits in the studied interval, its virtual absence may be related to the small sample size and to intense diagenetic overprint. Apart from dolomite, silica is a major diagenetic constituent and creator of reservoir heterogeneity. As previously stated, displacive silica nodules and thin concordant silica layers associated to facies F4 probably have a depositional-to-early diagenetic origin associated to a drop in pH. However, irregular and pervasive silicification and silica-filled fractures, associated to heavy minerals, points to a late and possible polyphase origin. Hydrothermal circulation of deep-sourced fluids has been proposed in the Brazilian pre-salt settings Herlinger et al. 2017 to be linked with processes such as dissolution, intense fracturing, silicification, dolomitization and crystallization of barite, fluorite, pyrite and other sulfides. Vieira de Luca et al. 2017 and Tritlla et al. 2019 identified late, hightemperature hydrothermal silicification in the Campos Basin including features such as quartz veins, stockworks and hydrothermal breccias. Facies succession and cyclicity Wide variations on spatial and temporal distributions of facies occur in the South Atlantic lacustrine carbonates and different facies may occur according to the well position 13 relative to paleobathymetric trends Ceraldi and Green 2016 . However, similar facies succession patterns have been noted, such as the cyclothem proposed by Wright and Barnett 2015, Fig. 3 and the shallowing upwards sequence identified by Ceraldi and Green 2016 . Figure 13 compiles elements from several studies on the pre-salt carbonates showing a schematic evolution model for the observed facies and its relationship to the main environmental factors proposed to control the succession of facies. A hypothesized sequence begins with deep, low energy, fresher water laminated dolomudstones F4 followed by alkaline, low energy, spherulitic wackestones grading to grainstones F3 and F4 , progressing to shallow water hybrid forms and shrub-dominated framestones F5 and F1 , and finally, intraclastic grainstones and rudstones F2 . F1 and F2 appear to be easily interchangeable due to shallow reworking. Detrital intraclastic facies may also occur in different moments of the cycle depending on high energy events or tectonically-induced transformations on local base level. Petrophysical properties and reservoir control The shrub-dominated facies were considered the best sag phase reservoirs in the Campos Herlinger et al. 2017 , Santos Wright and Tosca 2016 and Kwanza Saller et al. 2016 Basins. This is due to high growth framework porosity and fair permeability, added to the relative abundance of these facies in many pre-salt fields. However, for the sag phase deposits, the link between depositional facies and reservoir quality must be considered with caution. A wide range of poroperm values was identified by Herlinger et al. 2017 for similar shrub-dominated facies coalescent crust from the sag phase of the Campos Basin gas 0.2 16.1 , k 0.001 295.000 mD . Similar petrophysical heterogeneity was identified for shrub-dominated samples from the Barra Velha Formation gas 0.74 17.44 , k 0.001 25.00 mD in this study. These wide variations show that the reservoir potential for shrub-dominated facies may be attenuated or obliterated by post-depositional processes. Silica and dolomite cementation may modify large millimeter-scale growth-framework pores into numerous micropores that have little influence in permeability. Herlinger et al. 2017 , through MICP analysis, obtained an average microporosity of 37.50 and 50.94 for coalesced and non-coalesced calcite crusts, respectively. The Swi analysis performed for shrub-dominated samples resulted in similar results, with an average of 49.7 micropores. A similar degree of petrophysical heterogeneity occurs associated to spherulite and intraclast-dominated facies, with a wide range of reservoir qualities. The potential of these International Journal of Earth Sciences lithologies as reservoirs was also recognized by Saller et al. 2016 for the Kwanza Basin. The highest poroperm values obtained through petrographic image analysis, petrophysics and high-resolution CT-scan in this study were associated to spherulitic and intraclastic grainstones rudstones. However, such high poroperm values are only achieved by samples affected by matrix dissolution e.g., sample Bp5 . The importance of matrix dissolution for reservoir quality in the Brazilian pre-salt is also acknowledged by Herlinger et al. 2017 and Wright and Rodriguez 2018 . Spherulite and hybrid form-dominated facies affected by silicification, dolomitization and dolomite-cementation and laminated dolomudstones are usually non-reservoirs, presenting very low porosity e.g., F3, Figs. 9, 11d . Exceptions are represented by intervals marked by intense fracturing. As demonstrated by the tomography analysis, the laminated dolomudstones facies may have significant porosity related to the fracture system F4, Fig. 9 . The significant difference between segmented porosity and pore connectivity from high-resolution CT-scan and poroperm measured by the gas tests and NMR, indicates the importance of pores below 40 m CT-scan resolution limit . Even for samples dominated by macroporosity, pores below 40 m generally comprise more than half of the pore system and are responsible for great part of pore connectivity. Vuggy-cavernous and breccia porosity, possibly related to fluid percolation and karstification, were recognized in the pre-salt deposits Menezes de Jesus 2016 Vieira de Luca et al. 2017 Duarte et al. 2018 but did not significantly affect the studied core interval. Conclusions A detailed sedimentological and petrophysical investigation of Cretaceous pre-salt lacustrine carbonates from Southeast Brazil was performed based on core samples and nondestructive multi-scale petrophysical analyses. The target core interval is characterized by an assemblage of unusual calcite precipitates and grains including crystal shrubs, spherulites, hybrid forms, and intraclasts. These carbonates present outstanding petrophysical heterogeneity that reflects non-actualistic depositional conditions, complex diagenetic patterns, and possible hydrothermal influence that overprinted the initial fabric-controlled pore network. The best reservoir potential is associated to facies developed during stable lowstand, shallow water and moderateto-high energy settings, mainly shrubby framestones and spherulitic intraclastic grainstones rudstones. However, petrophysical data from different sources and scales evidenced that even these facies may present a wide range of poroperm values. Most of the target interval has a hybrid poroperm system control between depositional and diagenetic factors. Post-depositional processes, mainly dolomite cementation, dolomitization, silicification, and dissolution seem to play a greater role on determining the final porosity. Facies dominated by crystal shrubs with preserved enhanced growth framework porosity and reworked spherulites intraclasts, associated to matrix dissolution, presented the best reservoir characteristics, and the latter were associated to the highest poroperm values of the studied interval. Cemented shrubby framestones, in situ spherulitic hybrid forms, packstones, and dolomudstones are usually not reservoirs. In addition, facies characterized by millimeter-to-centimeter thick intercalation of crystal shrubs and fine detrital grains, and or spherulites, result in increased diagenetic differentiation and decreased poroperm in relation to thick pure shrubby framestones. The geological and petrophysical data presented here are expected to contribute to the Brazilian pre-salt explorations and production challenges and form the basis for future research on the still underexplored lacustrine carbonates. The limitations faced in this work are related to the relatively small data basis and the difficulty to fully access the petrophysical heterogeneity of these deposits due to resolution limits. To encompass the multi-scale porous systems and also maintain sample representativeness, new studies on petrophysical data conditioning, resolution improvements, and upscaling techniques are fundamental. In addition, multidisciplinary studies are needed to unveil the factors controlling the spatial and temporal patterns of post-depositional modifications. A deeper understanding of the dolomitization and silicification process, and how to upscale diagenetic and possible hydrothermal information to well-log and seismic data, are key to assemble proper 3D geological models. Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Equinor for the productive partnership and financial support during this project, and for granting permission to publish this study. ANP is also acknowledged for granting permission for publication. This study was financed in part by the Coordenac a o de Aperfeic oamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior Brasil CAPES Finance Code 001. We gratefully acknowledge reviewers Christian Betzler and Markus Mohr, and guest editor Ulrich Riller for their efforts on helping to improve the original manuscript. References Bastianini L, Rogerson M, Mercedes-Marti n R, Prior TJ, Cesar EA, Mayes WM 2019 What causes carbonates to form shrubby morphologies An anthropocene limestone case study. Front Earth Sci 7 1 19 Beasley CJ, Fiduk JC, Bize E, Boyd A, Frydman M, Zerilli A, Dribus JR, Moreira JLP, Capeleiro Pinto AC 2010 Brazil s presalt play. Oilfield Rev 22 3 28 37 13 International Journal of Earth Sciences Brownfield ME, Charpentier RR 2006 Geology and total petroleum systems of the West-Central Coastal Province 7203 , West Africa. US Geol Surv Bull 2207 52 Burne RV, Moore LS 1987 Microbialite organosedimentary deposits of benthic microbial communites. Palaios 2 241 254 Cainelli C, Mohriak WU 1999 Some remarks on the evolution of sedimentary basins along the Eastern Brazilian continental margin. Episodes 22 3 206 216 Carminatti M, Wolff B, Gamboa L 2008 New exploratory frontiers in Brazil. In Proceedings of the 19th world petroleum congress, Madrid, Spain, June 29 July 3, p 11 Ceraldi TS, Green D 2016 Evolution of the South Atlantic lacustrine deposits in response to Early Cretaceous rifting, subsidence and lake hydrology. In Ceraldi TS, Hodgkinson RA, Backe G eds Petroleum geoscience of the West Africa Margin, vol 438. Geological Society, London, p 77 Chafetz HS, Guidry SA 1999 Bacterial shrubs, crystal shrubs, and ray-crystal shrubs bacterial versus abiotic precipitation. Sediment Geol 126 57 74 Chafetz H, Barth J, Cook M, Guo X, Zhou J 2018 Origins of carbonate spherulites implications for Brazilian Aptian pre-salt reservoir. Sediment Geol 365 21 33 Chang HK, Kowsmann RO, Figueiredo AMF, Bender AA 1992 Tectonics and stratigraphy of the East Brazil Rift system an overview. Tectonophysics 213 97 138 Claes H, Erthal MM, Soete J, Ozkul M, Swennen R 2017 Shrub and pore type classification petrography of travertine shrubs from the Ballik Belevi area Denizli, SW Turkey . Quat Int 437 147 163 de Vieira Luca PH, Matias H, Carballo J, Sineva D, Pimentel GA, Tritlla J, Esteban M, Loma R, Alonso AJL, Jime nez RP, Pontet M, Martinez PB, Vega V 2017 Breaking barriers and paradigms in presalt exploration the Pa o de Ac u car discovery offshore Brazil . In Merrill RK, Sternbach CA eds Giant fields of the decade 2000 2010, vol 113. AAPG Memoir, Tulsa, pp 77 194 Dias JL 2005 Tecto nica, estratigrafia e sedimentac a o no Andar Aptiano da margem leste brasileira. Boletim Geocie ncias Petrobras 13 7 25 Duarte SB, Menezes de Jesus C, Farroco da Silva V, Sobreira MCA, Cristofaro RAL, Lima L, Mello e Silva FG, Marques de Sa CH, Berto FMO, Backheuser Y, Loureiro SA, Waldmann AT A, Fioriti LS 2018 Artificial intelligence use to predict severe fluid losses in pre-salt carbonates. In Annual logging symposium, London, UK, June 2 6, 2018 Erthal MM, Capezzuoli E, Mancini A, Claes H, Soete J, Swennen R 2017 Shrub morpho-types as indicator for the water flow energy Tivoli travertine case Central Italy . Sediment Geol 347 79 99 Flu gel E 2010 Microfacies of carbonate rocks analysis, interpretation and application. Springer, Berlin, p 983 Folk RL, Chafetz HS, Tiezzp PA 1985 Bizarre forms of depositional and diagenetic calcite in hot-spring travertines, central Italy. Soc Econ Paleontol Mineral 36 349 369 Gierlowski-Kordesch EH 2010 Lacustrine carbonates. In AlonzoZarza AM, Tanner LH eds Carbonates in continental settings. Developments in sedimentology. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 1 10161 Herlinger R Jr, Zambonato EE, De Ros LF 2017 Influence of diagenesis on the quality of lower cretaceous pre-salt lacustrine carbonate reservoir from Northern Campos Basin, Offshore Brazil. J Sediment Res 87 1285 1313 Herz N 1977 Timing of spreading in the South Atlantic information from Brazilian alkalic rocks. Geol Soc Am Bull 88 101 112 Mann J, Rigg JWD 2012 New geological insights into the Santos Basin. GeoExpro 9 1 36 40 13 Menezes de Jesus C, Compan ALM, Surmas R 2016 Permeability estimation using ultrasonic borehole image logs in dual-porosity carbonate reservoirs. Petrophysics 57 620 637 Mercedes-Marti n R, Ayora C, Tritlla J, Sa nchez-Roma n M 2019 The hydrochemical evolution of alkaline volcanic lakes a model to understand the South Atlantic pre-salt mineral assemblages. Earth Sci Rev 198 1 17 Mohriak W, Nemc ok M, Enciso G 2008 South Atlantic divergent margin evolution rift-border uplift and salt tectonics in the basins of SE, Brazil, vol 294. Geological Society, London, pp 365 398 Moreira JLP, Madeira CVM, Gil JA, Machado MAP 2007 Bacia de Santos. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras Rio de Janeiro 15 2 531 549 Muniz MC, Bosence DWJ 2015 Pre-salt microbialites from the Campos Basin offshore Brazil image log facies, facies model and cyclicity in lacustrine carbonates. In Bosence DWJ, Gibbons KA, et al. eds Microbial carbonates in space and time implications for global exploration and production. Geological Society, London, p 418 Nakano CMF, Pinto ACC, Marcusso JL, Minami K 2009 Pre-salt Santos Basin-extended well test and Production Pilot in the Tupi area-the planning phase. In Offshore technology conference pp 1 8 Okumura T, Takashima C, Shiraishi F, Akmaluddin A, Kano A 2012 Textural transition in an aragonite travertine formed under various flow conditions at Pancuran Pitu, Central Java, Indonesia. Sediment Geol 265 195 209 Pentecost A, Colleta P 2007 The role of photosynthesis and CO2 evasion on travertine formation a quantitative investigation at an important travertine-depositing hot spring. Le Zitelle, Italy. J Geol Soc Lond 164 843 853 Pentecost A, Viles H 1994 A review and reassessment of travertine classification. Geogr Phys Quat 48 305 314 Quirk DG, Hertle M, Jeppesen JW, Raven M, Mohriak WU, Kann D, Norgaard M, Howe MJ, Hsu D, Coffey B, Mendes MP 2013 Rifting, subsidence and continental break-up above a mantle plume in the central South Atlantic, vol 369. Geological Society, London Rainey DK, Jones B 2009 Abiotic versus biotic controls on the development of the Fairmont Hot Spring carbonate deposit, British Columbia, Canada. Sedimentology 56 1832 1857 Rezende MF, Pope MC 2015 Importance of depositional texture in pore characterization of subsalt microbialite carbonates, offshore Brazil. In Bosence DWJ, Gibbons KA, Le Heron DP, Morgan WA, Pritchard T, Vining BA eds Microbial carbonates in space and time Implications for global exploration and production. Geological Society, London418 Riding R 1991 Classification of microbial carbonates. In Riding R ed Calcareous algae and stromatolites. Springer, New York, pp 21 51 Riding R 2011a The nature of stromatolites 3500 million years of history and a century of research. In Reitner J, Que rc N, Arp G eds Advances in stromatolite geobiology. Springer, Berlin, p 554 Riding R 2011b Microbialites, stromatolites, and thrombolites. In Reitner J, Thiel V eds Encyclopedia of geobiology. Encyclopedia of earth science series. Springer, Heidelberg, pp 635 654 Rodrigues LA, Sauer IL 2015 Exploratory assessment of the economic gains of a pre-salt oil field in Brazil. Energy Policy 87 486 495 Rosa MB, Cavalcante de JSA, Miyakawa TM, Freitas LCS 2018 The giant Lula oil field world s largest oil production in ultra-deep water under a fast-track development. In Offshore technology conference, 30 April 3 May, Houston, Texas, USA International Journal of Earth Sciences Saller A, Rushton S, Buambua L, Inman K, McNeil R, Dickson JAD 2016 Pre-salt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola. AAPG Bull 100 7 1135 1164 Saur H, Se ne chal P, Boiron T, Aubourg C, Derluyn H, Moonen P 2020 First investigation of quartz and calcite shape fabrics in strained shales by means of X-ray tomography. J Struct Geol 130 103905 Silvestre BS, Dalcol PRT 2009 Geographical proximity and innovation evidences from the Campos Basin oil and gas industrial agglomeration Brazil. Technovation 29 546 561 Szatmari P 2000 Habitat of petroleum along the South Atlantic Margins. In Mello, M. R. and Katz, B. J. Petroleum Systems of South Atlantic Margins. The American Association of Petroleum Geologists, AAPG, Memoir 73 69 75 Terra GJS, Spadini AR, Franc a AB, Sombra CL, Zambonato EE, Juschaks LCS, Arienti LM, Erthal MM, Blauth M, Franco MP, Matsuda NS, Carramal da Silva NG, Moretti Junior PA, D Avila RSF, Souza RS, Tonietto SN, Anjos SMC, Campinho VS, Winter WR 2010 Classificac a o de rochas carbona ticas aplica vel a s bacias sedimentares brasileiras. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras 18 1 9 29 Tosca NJ, Wright VP 2015 Diagenetic pathways linked to labile Mgclays in lacustrine carbonate reservoirs a model for the origin of secondary porosity in the cretaceous pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, offshore Brazil. In Armitage PJ, Butcher AR, Churchill JM, Csoma AE, Hollis C, Lander RH, Omma JE, Worden RH eds Reservoir quality of clastic and carbonate rocks analysis, modelling and prediction, vol 435. Geological Society, London, pp 33 46 Tritlla J, Esteban M, Loma R, Mattos A, Sanders C, Videira De Luca PH, Carrasco A, Gerona M, Herra A, Carballo J 2019 Where have most of the carbonates gone Silicified Aptian pre-salt microbial carbonates in South Atlantic basins Brazil and Angola . In Bathurst meeting 2019 Mallorca, Spain Vlassenbroeck J, Cnudde V, Masschaele B, Dierick M, Hoorebeke Van L, Jacobs P, Pieters K 2007 A comparative and critical study of X-ray CT and neutron CT as non-destructive material evaluation techniques, vol 271. Geological Society, London, pp 277 285 Wright VP, Barnett AJ 2015 An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates. From Bosence DWJ, Gibbons KA, Le Heron D P, Morgan WA, Pritchard T, Vining BA eds Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 418. Wright P, Barnett A 2017 Classifying reservoir carbonates when the status quo simply does not work a case study from the cretaceous of the South Atlantic. In AAPG search and discovery article 51419 2017 Wright P, Rodriguez K 2018 Reinterpreting the South Atlantic presalt Microbialite reservoir petrographic, isotopic and seismic evidence for a shallow evaporitic lake depositional model. First Break 36 71 77 Wright P, Tosca N 2016 A geochemical model for the formation of the pre-salt reservoirs, Santos Basin, Brazil implications for understanding reservoir distribution. In AAPG Search and Discovery Article 51304 2016 13

[END_OF_PAPER]

14 Tavares dos Santos, P., and A. C. Gordon, 2021, Bu zios field Geological setting of the largest pre-salt field, Santos Basin, Brazil, in Marcio R. Mello, Pinar O. Yilmaz, and Barry J. Katz, eds., The supergiant Lower Cretaceous pre-salt petroleum systems of the Santos Basin, Brazil AAPG Memoir 124, p. 375 394. Bu zios Field Geological Setting of the Largest Pre-Salt Field, Santos Basin, Brazil P. Tavares dos Santos1 and A. C. Gordon2 1 Rio de Janeiro State University, Faculty of Geology, Rua Sa o Francisco Xavier, 524 s. 4024-A, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, CEP 20550-018 e-mail pri.geobio gmail.com 2 ACG Consulting, Travessa Santa Leocadia, 19, Copacabana, 22061-050, Rio de Janeiro RJ, Brazil e-mail acgordon ymail.com ABSTRACT Bu zios, discovered in 2010, is a supergiant pre-salt field, located in the Santos Basin. The main reservoirs are lacustrine carbonates, deposited from the Barremian until the Aptian. Preliminary estimates indicate a volume of oil in place OIP on the order of 29,900 MMBOE, thereby ranking it as the largest of the pre-salt fields. The understanding of pre-salt reservoirs continues to be a challenge because of complex facies distributions and tectono-stratigraphy. This study focuses on describing the tectono-stratigraphic framework of Bu zios Field, using criteria from 3-D seismic, well log, and core data. Three-dimensional seismic interpretation reveals the Bu zios rift configuration as a series of horst, graben, and half-graben structures, which are highly faulted N30W N30E because of a complex transfer zone interpreted in the area. Based on seismic interpretation, the rift section was subdivided into a lower and upper rift section. The lower rift section was strongly affected by normal faults, whereas the upper rift was exposed to a less expressive faulting process and has a thinner sedimentary wedge. The upper section corresponds to a commonly observed coquina interval the Itapema Formation , which serves as the lower pre-salt reservoir in the Bu zios Field. Lastly, prior to salt deposition, the post-rift mega-sequence sag section is comprised of the Barra Velha Formation, which is composed of biotic and abiotic carbonate reservoirs in a complex structural setting. Based on core analysis from the 3-BRSA-944A-RJS well, the most common facies in the Itapema Formation reservoirs are rudstone and grainstone, composed of bivalve shells, with an average porosity and permeability of 12.5 and 88.7 md, respectively. The Barra Velha Formation reservoirs consist of four main carbonate facies spherulites most common , crystal shrub, carbonate laminates, and rare stromatolites, which display an average porosity and permeability of 9.4 and 122.6 md, respectively. Copyright 2021 by The American Association of Petroleum Geologists. DOI 10.1306 13722365MSB.14.1853 375 376 TAVARES ET AL. INTRODUCTION Bu zios is a supergiant oil and gas field with pre-salt carbonate reservoirs covering an area around 852 km2 the hydrocarbon accumulation is situated in the northern Santos Basin, in southeast Brazil, approximately 180 km off the coast of Rio de Janeiro in 2,000 m of water Figure 1 . The field was discovered in 2010 by Petrobras and was the most important find in the successful exploration campaign of the Barremian-Aptian age lacustrine carbonate play in Brazil s offshore. The Bu zios Field is operated by Petrobras 90 stake in a consortium with CNODC 5 stake and CNOOC 5 stake . Bu zios is considered to possess the largest, single field original oil in place OOIP volume ever discovered in Brazil ANP, 2016 and currently reached a new record in terms of daily production 790 MBOE d , and when full development is achieved, the field will provide a dramatic increase in Brazilian daily production Petersohn, 2019 . The Santos Basin is characterized by one of the most prolific petroleum provinces in the deep-water region of offshore Brazil, with well-known source rock and carbonate reservoirs associated with a l acustrine rift system. This resulted in a prime hydrocarbon province with the largest offshore oil reserves discovered in the 21st century Berman, 2008 C arminatti et al., 2008 Mohriak, 2015 . The Santos B asin s current daily output of 2.58 MMBOE d makes it responsible for most of the Brazilian hydrocarbon production ANP, 2020 . SCOPE, DATABASE, AND METHODOLOGY This study focuses on describing the tectono- stratigraphic framework of Bu zios Field, using public seismic, well log and core data sets, which were made available through the courtesy of the National Petroleum, Natural Gas, and Biofuels Agency ANP . Figure 1. Residual Bouguer gravity and regional location map. Legend 1 Serra do Mar and Mantiqueira coastal ranges 2 Cretaceous hinge line 3 Floriano polis high 4 Cabo Frio high 5 ocean crust boundary 6 external high after Gomes et al., 2012 7 Cruzeiro do Sul lineament 8 Floriano polis oceanic fracture zone 9 ANP pre-salt polygon Bu zios Field highlighted in magenta and black polygons are Santos and Campos fields. Bu zios Field Geological Setting of the Largest Pre-Salt Field, Santos Basin, Brazil 377 The seismic data set comprise a 3-D PSDM volume, with 10-sec record length, 4 msec sampling interval, and 25 12.5 m bin size, and five key exploration wells 2-ANP-1-RJS 3-BRSA-944A-RJS 3-BRSA-1053-RJS 3-BRSA-1064-RJS and 9-BRSA-1159-RJS that were selected for well correlation, well-to-seismic tie, electric logs, core image, and thin sections photos used to interpret the reservoir facies distribution. The core data from the well 3-BRSA-944A-RJS were used to illustrate the main reservoir facies. REGIONAL GEOLOGICAL SETTING The Santos Basin developed as part of an extensive continental rift system during the breakup of the western Gondwana Supercontinent in the Lower Cretaceous, which then evolved into a passive divergent margin Moreira et al., 2007 Chang et al., 2008 and references therein . The basin has an area of approximately 350,000 km 2 from the coastline to the salt limit at a bathymetry of about 3,000 m. It is delimited to the north by the Cabo Frio High and to the south by the Floriano polis high, which separates the Santos Basin from the Campos and Pelotas basins, respectively Figure 1 . The western margin of the basin is defined by the pre-Aptian limit, which separates the rift basin from the uplifted Precambrian rocks of the Ribeira Belt, including the 2,000-m-high Serra do Mar and Mantiqueira coastal ranges Figure 1 . The eastern margin is characterized by the transition to oceanic crust with alternative boundaries p roposed by several authors e.g., Karner, 2000 Mohriak, 2001 Kumar et al., 2012 . The onshore Ribeira Belt continues underneath the offshore Santos Basin, exerting a strong structural control during the rifting Schmitt et al., 2008 . The crustal inheritance in the offshore Santos Basin can be recognized in the northeast-southwest and east- northeast west-southwest fault trends and in the subtle northwest-southeast shear zones. Authors such as Meisling et al. 2001 and Rigoti 2015 consider that the shear zones became a significant structural control of the oblique rifting process of the basin, resulting in a regional sinistral faulting and the generation of structural highs that conditioned the subsequent carbonate deposition. The basin s sedimentary evolution took place in three main phases or mega-sequences, as follows the rift phase, post-rift or sag phase, and drift phase Moreira et al., 2007 Figure 2 . The rift phase extends from the Hauterevian until the early Aptian and is divided into lower and upper intervals, based on two different periods of tectonic activity, separated by a seismically mappable unconformity Figure 2 . The initial Hauterevian lower rift Karner and Driscoll, 1999 created deep depocenters and a profuse trend of normal faults with north-northeast south-southwest orientation. The main structures developed in this stage were half grabens associated with extensive synrift vulcanism, known as the Camboriu Formation, which constitutes the economic basement of the basin Szatmari, 2000 Dias, 2005 . The Barremian-aged upper rift includes alluvial and fluvial siliciclastic deposits in proximal settings that grade into organic-rich shales in distal lacustrine environments. These more distal facies in the lower rift form an important source rock known as the Pic arras Formation, which directly overlies the basalts Figure 2 . The late rift continued into the early Aptian, depositing mudstones with organic-rich intervals main source rock for the pre-salt and coquina sequences into a restricted fluvio-lacustrine environment. This unit is known as the Itapema Formation, and the coquinas, which are mainly developed on structural highs, constitute an important reservoir for the pre-salt fields. This interval is characterized by lesser tectonic activity and an increasing influence of thermal subsidence in the basin. The end of this phase is defined by the Pre-Alagoas Unconformity, which is clearly expressed on seismic data as an angular unconformity Moreira et al., 2007 Figure 2 . Sedimentation in restricted conditions continued during Aptian into a phase of thermal subsidence, termed the sag phase, in which spherulites, crystal shrubs, laminites calci-mudstone , and stromatolites are predominantly observed. These facies are known as Barra Velha Formation and include the most important reservoir rock types in pre-salt fields Moreira et al., 2007 . The Barra Velha reservoirs are observed on numerous structural highs in the Santos Basin, such as Lula, Mero, and Bu zios fields. The most important pre-salt fields are located in the Santos Outer High Gomes et al., 2012 Figures 1, 3A . Continued environmental restriction by the end of Aptian resulted in the deposition of an extensive evaporitic sequence, the Ariri Formation, which covered the pre-salt sequence completely. Regionally, the Ariri Formation has been interpreted to be deposited in a relatively short period of time, less than 1,000,000 Ma, based on paleontological analysis of bounding sediments, and initial salt deposits ranging from 200 m nearshore to 1,000 m thick in the central salt basin Moreira et al., 2007 Gamboa et al., 2009 . This thick evaporitic unit serves as the predominant sealing layer for pre-salt discoveries and provides the mechanism for the generation of post-salt structures. The 378 TAVARES ET AL. Figure 2. Santos Basin stratigraphic chart and petroleum system after Moreira et al., 2007 Chang et al., 2008 . drift phase initiated in the Albian, with deposition of platform to deep basin carbonates, has continued to the present, with the deposition of several sequences of siliciclastic rocks in open marine conditions. BU ZIOS FIELD Exploration History and Field Highlights The Bu zios Field is located within the cluster of very large pre-salt oil fields including Lula, Mero, Sururu, and Atapu Figure 3A . Bu zios is considered the largest oil field, in terms of in-place volumes, of any presalt field discovered to date, with an estimated OOIP on the order of 29,900 MMBOE Figure 3B . Bu zios reserves account for 66.6 of the total Brazilian proven reserves 15 billion of barrels as of November 2019 and could become the seventh- largest offshore oil field in the world, depending on the life and efficiency of the production phase. In terms of hydrocarbon production, Bu zios is currently producing the second-highest rate of all pre-salt fields in Brazil, after only the Lula Field ANP, 2020 , and with the increasing number of floating production storage and offloading FPSO units, it is believed that its production will exceed Lula s in the near future. The field was discovered by Petrobras in collaboration with ANP by the drilling of the well 2-ANP1-RJS originally named as Franco Field . The 2-ANP1-RJS well resulted in the discovery of a 29.5o API oil, with a 371-m column of carbonate reservoirs between 5,000 and 6,000 m depth MD . The reservoir quality was relatively good, with an average porosity of 9 Bu zios Field Geological Setting of the Largest Pre-Salt Field, Santos Basin, Brazil 379 Figure 3. Bu zios Field in numbers. A Bathymetry map of Santos Basin highlighted in yellow, the Bu zios Field, and in green, the principal pre-salt field locations. Legend 1 Bu zios Field 2 Lula Field 3 Mero Field 4 Sururu Field 5 Atapu Field 6 Se pia Field 7 Sapinhoa Field 8 Berbiga o Field 9 Itapu Field 10 Lapa Field 11 Sul Sapinhoa Field 12 Tambuata Field. B Field size distribution of main pre-salt fields OOIP in billion barrels of oil equivalent . C Bu zios Field production history after ANP, 2020 . 380 TAVARES ET AL. Figure 3. Continued and effective permeability of 70 md. The well also encountered an oil water contact OWC at 5,782 m Petersohn and Abelha, 2013 . Petrobras declared the commerciality of the field, in December 2013, after drilling 10 exploration and appraisal wells. The field development, approved in 2016, considered the installation of six FPSO units with each capable of producing 150,000 barrels day of oil and 6,000,000 m3 d of gas. The first oil production was achieved in 2018, and the field s current average daily production is 487 Mbbl oil d and 18 Mm3 gas d ANP, 2020 Figure 3C , while being limited by the capacity of the four installed FPSO units FPSO P-74, P-75, P76, and P-77 . If the field production plan is followed, upon full development, the Bu zios Field should reach a peak-production rate of 900,000 BOE d. T oday, the field has a total of 53 exploration, appraisal, and development wells drilled within closure. Tectono-Stratigraphic Framework The good-quality 3-D PSDM seismic data allowed the interpretation and mapping of the acoustic basement, the rift, post-rift, and drift mega-sequences Moreira et al., 2007 . The following sections discuss an integration of seismic well ties and lithologic descriptions used to define the stratigraphic section observed at Bu zios Field. Acoustic Basement and Rifting Style The mapping of the top of the acoustic basement Figures 4 8 is based mainly on the reflective versus nonreflective seismic textures observed in the 3-D PSDM volume. In the Bu zios Field, there isn t a clear and continuous seismic reflector representing the base of synrift basement interface Figures 5 8 . Some wells sampled igneous rocks within the Pic arras Formation, for example, the well 3-BRSA-1053-RJS Figures 8 10 that drilled 130 m of basalt intercalated with volcanoclastic rocks. Because of the absence of absolute ages, it is not possible to assign this basalt to the Pic arras or Camboriu Formation. Unfortunately, there are no public radiometric ages of Bu zios basalts, but based on stratigraphic correlations, it is likely that these rocks are a product of two magmatic events that took place in the lower rift sequence Moreira et al., 2007 Figure 2 . The Bu zios Field is located in the Santos Basin Outer High region, an uplifted area that remained high since rifting times Gomes et al., 2012 Figure 1 . Bu zios Field Geological Setting of the Largest Pre-Salt Field, Santos Basin, Brazil 381 Figure 4. Bu zios Field seismic maps. A Base of salt regional map TVD m modified from Freitas, 2019. Legend Black polygons are the main pre-salt fields and Bu zios Field highlighted in magenta. B Basement structure map TVD m . Legend Green dots are the selected wells white lines are the location of seismic sections examples of Figures 5 8 light-blue line is the well cross-section location of Figure 10 the main faults are represented by gray polygons, and the upper-right diagram is the rose fault orientation diagram. C Rift section lower and upper isochore map meters . Legend Green dots are the selected wells white lines are the location of seismic sections examples of Figures 5 8 light-blue line is the well cross-section location of Figure 10. Structurally, Bu zios rift configuration exhibits a series of horst, graben, and half-graben structures, highly faulted and therefore resulted in a complex transfer zone Figure 4B . The general arrangement of the rift-fault system is a series of normal faults with N30W N30E orientations. The Bu zios transfer zone exhibits convergent, divergent, and synthetic most common transfer zone geometries Morley, 1999 Figure 4B . The rifting tectonic style in the Santos Basin displays a regional trend northeast-southwest with northwest, north-northwest, and north-northeast secondary orientations, which resulted from an oblique rift opening Szatmari et al., 1984 Meisling et al., 2001 Dehler et al., 2016 and references therein . Oblique rifting outcomes and processes, obtained through analog modeling, show strong analogies with the tectonic style observed in the Santos Basin Clifton et al., 2000 McClay et al., 2002 . Sand box experiments with high obliquity 30 degrees mimicked very well the intricate S shape fault patterns of the Santos Basin Clifton et al., 2000 . The base salt map 382 TAVARES ET AL. Figure 4. Continued of Figure 4A after Freitas, 2019 clearly displays the regional distribution of the S shape structures and faults with northwest-southeast, north-south, and northeast-southwest main trends, conditioning the distribution of the pre-salt reservoirs. The Bu zios Field complex transfer zone that was interpreted in the 3-D seismic volume is a local fractal of the northsouth regional trend Figure 4A . The Rift Mega-Sequence Based on seismic reflector terminations, a regional unconformity referred to as the Top Intra Rift boundary Figures 5 8 is identified in the seismic data, allowing the subdivision of the rift mega- sequence into lower and upper rift sequences. As mapped on seismic, the thickness of the rift mega- sequence is strongly controlled by tectonics Figure 4C , reaching maximum thickness of about 2,800 m in structural lows and minimum thickness around 200 m on the structural highs. The lower rift sequence is topped by truncated reflectors Intra Barremian Unconformity or Top Intra Rift Unconformity and bottomed by onlapping onto the acoustic basement. Seismically, it is characterized by the presence of important divergent reflector patterns or wedges with variable reflectivity, and it is strongly affected by normal faulting. The upper rift sequence is topped by the Top Rift Unconformity, described as the Pre-Alagoas Unconformity Moreira et al., 2007 . Regionally, the upper rift sequence exhibits less expressive reflector wedges, which tend to concentrate at the base of the sequence, altering to subparallel reflector patterns toward the top. Locally, this unit reveals distinctive seismic facies such as clinoforms with weak seismic amplitude and sigmoidal external geometries. The upper rift sequence is also affected by normal faults but to lesser degree. The lower rift sequence corresponds to the K36 sequence and lithostratigraphically to the Pic arras Formation Moreira et al., 2007 Figure 2 . The K36 Bu zios Field Geological Setting of the Largest Pre-Salt Field, Santos Basin, Brazil 383 Figure 4. Continued Figure 5. Seismic example at northern Bu zios Field DIP line-PSDM . Legend Line location in Figure 4B. 1 Sea b ottom reflector 2 top of salt reflector 3 base of salt reflector 4 top rift reflector 5 top intra-rift reflector 6 acoustic basement reflector TS top of salt at well BS base of salt at well TR top of rift at well. Strip log of pre-salt section of well 3- BRSA-944-RJS right with indication of cored interval, well tops, and analyzed biostratigraphy interval. 384 TAVARES ET AL. Figure 6. Seismic example at central Bu zios Field DIP line-PSDM . Legend Line location in Figure 4B. 1 Sea bottom r eflector 2 top of salt reflector 3 base of salt reflector 4 top rift reflector 5 top intra-rift reflector 6 acoustic basement reflector TS top of salt at well BS base of salt at well TR top of rift at well. Strip log of pre-salt section of well 2ANP1 right with indication of cored interval, top boundaries, and analyzed biostratigraphy interval. Figure 7. Seismic example at southern Bu zios Field DIP line-PSDM . Legend Line location in Figure 4B. 1 Sea b ottom r eflector 2 top of salt reflector 3 base of salt reflector 4 top rift reflector 5 top intra-rift reflector 6 acoustic basement reflector TS top of salt at well BS base of salt at well TR top of rift at well IR top of intra-rift at well. Strip log of pre-salt section of well 3-BRSA-1064-RJS right with well tops. Bu zios Field Geological Setting of the Largest Pre-Salt Field, Santos Basin, Brazil 385 sequence records the lacustrine and fluvial-deltaic environments formed within rift valleys during the Barremian Upper Aratu and Buracica local stages . This sequence displays the largest development of sedimentary wedges with thickening of the strata toward the hanging wall, reaching thicknesses of up to 2,200 m Figures 5 8 . This section was penetrated by wells 3-BRSA-1064-RJS and 9-BRSA-1159-RJS, with up to 150 m of siltstones, and siltstones with thin intercalations of carbonates and marls, as can be noted in the well cross section of Figure 10. The upper rift sequence corresponds to the K38 s equence and lithostratigraphically to the Itapema Formation. According to Moreira et al. 2007 Figure 2 , the K38 sequence occurs from Barremian to early A ptian Jiquia local stage , and it is also known as the coquinas section. In the Bu zios Field, this s equence is mainly characterized by bivalve rudstones and in a lesser degree, by bioclastic grainstones, p ackstones, wackstones, mudstones, and shales that were deposited in a lacustrine environment. The c oquinas d eposits have been drilled by most of the wells within the Bu zios Field and can form a thick package of porous layer reaching a maximum thickness of 300 m, Figure 10 and interpreted to be related to high energy environments with intense hydraulic shifting and transportation in deeper water settings. The upper rift sequence is thinner than the lower rift sequence up to 800 m thick Figures 5 8 , and the fact of displaying less-developed sedimentary wedges and a less expressive fault system is likely indicative of a decrease in subsidence because of the continental rift expansion. The upper rift sequence forms a very important lower pre-salt reservoir section, and it is, therefore, discussed in more detail later. The Post-Rift Mega-Sequence The post-rift mega-sequence also known as the t ransitional or sag phase includes complex biotic and abiotic carbonates reservoirs of the Barra Velha Formation Della Porta et al., 2012 Wright and Barnett, 2015 Saller et al., 2016 and evaporite deposits Ariri Formation . Moreira et al. 2007 divided the post-rift mega- sequence in three sequences K44, K46-48, and K50. The K44 and K46-48 correspond lithostratigrap hically to the Barra Velha Formation, and the K50 corresponds to the Ariri Formation. Although the Barra Velha Formation is formally subdivided into two sequences in the geological literature Moreira et al., 2007 , in the Figure 8. Seismic example at southern Bu zios Field DIP line-PSDM . Legend Line location in Figure 4B. 1 Sea b ottom r eflector 2 top of salt reflector 3 base of salt reflector 4 top rift reflector 5 top intra-rift reflector 6 acoustic basement reflector TS top of salt at well BS base of salt at well TR top of rift at well. Strip log of pre-salt section of well 3-BRSA-1053-RJS right with well tops. 386 TAVARES ET AL. Bu zios Field, the seismic identification of the K44 sequence is unclear. Because of that, they were treated together merging the K44 and K46-48 into the same interval, which is defined from the Pre-Alagoas Unconformity to the base of salt. The Aptian Barra Velha carbonates constitute the upper pre-salt reservoirs Alagoas local stage Moreira et al., 2007 Figure 2 . Seismically, they display a series of parallel and subparallel reflectors of variable amplitude, small-scale progradation, rarely affected by faults and exhibits common features such as a carbonate ramps and mounds Figures 5 8 . Structurally, this unit displays a complex structure Figure 9A , and the carbonates were deposited preferentially onto preexisting basement highs and, therefore, developed ramplike features between the structural highs, interconnecting several rift structures. At the Bu zios Field, the thickness of this unit ranges approximately from 200 to 400 m at structural highs Figures 9B, 10 , as observed in the wells, and reaches a maximum interpreted thickness of about 850 m on the structure flanks on the seismic data. The Barra Velha section is addressed in more detail later. The Aptian Ariri Formation Figure 2 is a stratified evaporite unit forming salt walls and diapir structures. The salt structures reach thickness up to 2,650 m in the Figure 9. Bu zios Field seismic maps. A Base of Salt structure map top reservoir depth structure, TVD m . Legend Green dots are the selected wells white lines are the location of seismic sections examples of Figures 5 8 light-blue line is the well cross-section location of Figure 10 the main faults are represented by gray polygons. B Post-rift section isochore map meters . Legend Green dots are the selected wells white lines are the location of seismic sections examples of Figures 5 8 light-blue line is the well cross-section location of Figure 10 the main faults are represented by gray polygons. Bu zios Field Geological Setting of the Largest Pre-Salt Field, Santos Basin, Brazil 387 Figure 9. Continued central part of the Bu zios Field, with thickness diminishing toward the northern and southern limits of the field concession, forming salt windows Figures 5 8 . In the Bu zios Field, the stratified evaporites start systematically with a basal anhydrite layer followed by thick halite, which is the most common e vaporite deposit. The halite is intercalated with layers of anhydrite, carnallite, tachyhydrite, and sylvite, indicative of several brine water flooding and desiccation c ycles over time Gamboa et al., 2009 . The presence of a thick salt layer is a key component of Bu zios petroleum system, acting as an important regional seal, and providing thermal dissipation avoiding the overmaturation of the source rock and resulting hydrocarbons. The Drift Mega-Sequence and Volcanism The post-salt sediments of the basin, also known as the drift mega-sequence, were deposited in a well- e stablished marine environment. This mega- sequence starts in the Bu zios area with thin carbonate deposits of the Guaruja Formation Moreira et al., 2007 Figure 2 , which is composed of fine grain carbonates mainly mudstone and calcilutites deposited in distal restricted marine conditions with typical thickness from 10 to 30 m. Guaruja deposition was followed by Cenomanian marls, up to 200-m thick, of the Itanhae m Formation. From Turonian to recent time, an expressive siliciclastic section up to 1,560-m thick of shales, sandstones, and marls was deposited in open marine conditions Moreira et al., 2007 Figure 2 . Structurally, the post-salt deposits in Bu zios area are fully controlled by halokinesis. Although the Bu zios Field area seems to be less affected by magmatism when compared to the Libra Block and Mero Field areas, volcanic rocks have been drilled below the Itapema reservoirs well 3-BRSA1053-RJS, Figure 9 , and younger diabase intrusions 388 TAVARES ET AL. Figure 10. Cross section of selected wells. Well cross section across the main structure in Bu zios Field. Cross-section location in Figure 4B. were emplaced in the pre-salt and the e vaporitic sections see well 3-BRSA-1195 724-RJS in Mello et al., 2021b . Petroleum System The pre-salt source rock systems that are present in the Santos Basin can be attributed to the favorable environmental, paleogeographic, and limited water circulation conditions, imposed by the Rio Grande-Walvis Ridge during the Lower Cretaceous time, in the lakes that existed in the area Huc, 2004 Mello et al., 2021b . The lacustrine brackish-saline calcareous black shales from the Itapema Formation K38, Figure 2 are the most well-documented source rocks in the Santos Basin Mello et al., 2021a, b and are interpreted to be responsible for the most of all the oil discovered to date. The total organic carbon TOC of the Itapema source rocks ranges from 1 to 12 , is composed by type I kerogen, and has measured hydrogen index values of up to 900 mg HC mg TOC Chang et al., 2008 Petersohn and Abelha, 2013 cf., Mello et al., 2021a, b . The source rock capacity on Pic arras Formation K36 is less known, but its presence cannot be ruled out in the deep depocenters located around the Bu zios area cf., Mello et al., 2021b . The presence of these systems is expected, through seismic data interpretation, in the structural lows around the Bu zios Field where the synrift and post-rift sections can reach thicknesses of up to 2,800 and 800 m, respectively Figures 4C, 9B . Inferred hydrocarbon migration took vertical and lateral pathways along a dense fault system and through carrier beds of the synrift and post-rift reservoir facies present in the area. The Bu zios trap is a complex structure that comprises a central high and four lateral satellite structures arms that radiate from this central structural feature. The central high is an elongated, four-way structure, north-south oriented, and the lateral arms display northwest, north-northwest, southwest, and southeast orientation and with minor relief Figure 9A . Based on the available pressure data MDT and well test results, the calculated OWCs for the field only vary slightly, from 5,782 to 5,787 m. This depth range is very close to the spill point of the structure as observed in the 3-D seismic mapping, suggesting that the Bu zios Field structure was filled to spill Figure 9A . The main seal for the Bu zios pre-salt reservoirs is the thick evaporitic sequence Ariri Formation , deposited during the late Aptian. Bu zios Field Geological Setting of the Largest Pre-Salt Field, Santos Basin, Brazil 389 Reservoir Geology Bu zios Field reservoirs are composed of a thick package of carbonates, deposited during late Barremian to Aptian ages, which are represented mainly by coquinas from the upper rift sequence Itapema Formation reservoir and spherulites most common and crystal shrubs from the post-rift sag sequence Barra Velha Formation reservoir , which are the most prolific reservoirs in the Santos Basin. Both units exhibit large amounts of vertical and lateral facies variation that can be observed at different scales, such as seismic data, well and image logs, and cores Figures 10, 11 , indicating a heterogeneous reservoir distribution and a wide range of reservoir properties. Itapema Formation Reservoir The Itapema Formation is composed of interbedded units of lacustrine, mollusk-rich carbonates coquinas and shales. The coquinas were accumulated in the upper rift section in a lacustrine environment, during the Jiquia local stage Figure 2 . Ostracod biozone Candona centroimpressa and Cyprideis frugosa are also Figure 11. Well 3-BRSA-944-RJS. A epresentative log for Bu zios Field, R showing Barra Velha and Itapema formations, and highlighted in red the core interval. B Schematic core facies description based on Petrobras report and interpretation. 390 TAVARES ET AL. present along the eastern Brazilian margin Schaller, 1969 and were affected by the rifting t ectonism Figure 10 . They represent a complex sequence, where the lower coquinas sequence is commonly intercalated with shales and the upper coquinas sequence interfingers laterally with alluvial fluvial deposits. The top of the coquinas sequence marks an important change in the lake conditions in terms of water level and chemistry Muniz, 2013 Thompson et al., 2015 . The Itapema reservoirs were interpreted to be deposited during a time of a deep-stratified lake with a clear shift in the gamma ray, density, and sonic log responses and a notable unconformity in seismic data Figures 10, 12A . Beyond that, the Itapema Formation shows an abundant and a diverse faunal population when compared with the Barra Velha Formation, which suggests an important difference in terms of lake water level, transforming from a deeper lake to more restricted-evaporitic lake, probably influenced by tectonic environment and climate changes. Based on Sr87 Sr86 isotopic analyses, Pietzsch et al. 2018 interpreted the evolution of the pre-salt lake from an initial, large, and deep lake that progressively evolved into a very constrained lake with the increment of the evaporation rate and the water lake alkalinity. The coquina sequence has been cored in the 3- B RSA-944A-RJS and 9-BRSA-1159-RJS wells. Rudstone and grainstone are the most common facies 3-BRSA-944A-RJS core Figures 10, 11 , with the rare occurrence of wackestone and mudstone Figure 12A . The rudstone facies are scattered, composed of bivalve shells, displaying moldic porosity and vugs, and show massive, cross-bedded depositional features. The grainstone is the main facies in the coquinas sequence, with bivalves dominant , gastropods, and ostracods. The shells appear reworked, rarely in situ, and may have undergone recrystallization during late diagenetic mineral substitution. Porosity types are moldic, vuggy, and intergranular, exhibiting cross-bedding structures. Conventional and sidewall core analyses of the Itapema reservoirs 698 samples display a large range of properties distribution with average porosity of 12.5 P90 P10 4.7 19.1 and average permeability of 88.7 md P90 P10 0 204 md . Figure 12. Schematic sections of Itapema and Barra Velha lakes in the Bu zios Field. A Schematic facies model for Itapema Formation, formed in a deep lake, based on the interpretation of core image and thin sections photo of the well 3-BRSA-944-RJS. The main reservoir facies are coquina carbonates. In distal areas organic-rich calcareous shales were deposited, which is considered the main source rock in the basin Mello et al., 2021b . B Schematic facies model for Barra Velha Formation, formed in a shallow lake, based on the interpretation of core image and thin section photo of the well 3-BRSA944-RJS. The main reservoir facies are crystal shrub and grainstone reworked. Bu zios Field Geological Setting of the Largest Pre-Salt Field, Santos Basin, Brazil 391 Figure 12. Continued Barra Velha Formation Reservoir The Barra Velha Formation constitutes the main reservoirs of the Bu zios Field, with four main carbonate facies spherulites most common , carbonate laminates, shrub, and stromatolites Figures 10 12 . These carbonate reservoirs were deposited in an alkaline lacustrine environment and were highly influenced by the lake water level changes and by the paleogeography at the time of deposition Della Porta et al., 2012 Wright and Barnett, 2015 Figure 12B . The Barra Velha reservoirs have been cored by wells 2-ANP-1-RJS, 3-BRSA-944A-RJS, and 9-BRSA1159-RJS Figure 11 . The core from the 3-BRSA-944ARJS well exhibits all the main reservoir facies, such as spherulite, crystal shrub, stromatolite, and laminate Figures 12B, 13 . The spherulite facies most common are characterized by rounded and subrounded grains, with clay or micrite matrix, sometimes substituted by dolomite. Porosity types are intergranular porosity mainly produced by diagenetic dissolution and microporosity. The crystal shrub facies are localized and display a dendritic plumose geometry, filled by micrite or a clay matrix and rarely filled by calcite silica, exhibiting vug, intracrystalline, and intergranular porosity. The stromatolite facies display predominately growth structures with convex geometry and moderate sorting and have fenestral and vug porosity. The laminate facies are millimeter to centimetersized but locally display a massive appearance. The laminates contain silica nodules and calcite pyrite concretions, which can be replaced by dolomite. Porosity and permeability are low, but production is possible mainly because of fractures. Conventional and sidewall core porosity and permeability analyses of the Barra Velha reservoir 783 samples display a large range of distribution with average porosity values of 9.4 P90 P10 1.8 16.9 and average permeability of 122.6 md P90 P10 0 230 md . The genesis of the pre-salt carbonate rocks has been the subject of a profound debate about their origin since the first discoveries of the pre-salt oil fields in the Santos Basin. The disputes are mainly because of the lack of good modern or ancient analogs, the complex and unique settings that occurred during the South Atlantic rifting processes, and the still scarce availability of published information mostly because of commercial competitiveness Farias et al., 2019 Wright, 2019 . Currently, there are three main theories to explain the Barra Velha reservoir origin 392 TAVARES ET AL. Figure 13. Core photos and thin section from 3-BRSA-944-RJS well, illustrating the main facies present in Itapema and Barra Velha formations reservoirs. Legend 1a Core photo displaying the most common facies of coquinas, rudstone with bivalve shells 1b thin section in Itapema interval, showing recrystallization around shells 2a laminates from Barra Velha Formation, showing cross-bedding and silica calcite nodules 2b thin section showing opal nodule in laminates facies from Barra Velha Formation 3a spherulites, the most common facies in Barra Velha Formation, showing fining upward with the grain very rounded 3b thin section from spherulites showing vug porosity 4a crystal shrubs from Barra Velha Formation, intercalated with spherulites 4b thin section with spherulites and crystal shrubs 5a stromatolite from Barra Velha Formation, displaying growth convex structure and with fenestral and vug porosity. 1. Microbiological induced or microbialite origin biotic origin Bonsence et al., 2015 Saller et al., 2016 where the facies of the microbialites were controlled by the depth, the hyper-salinity, and the biologic activity in the lake 2. Chemical precipitation or abiotic origin Wright and Barnett, 2015 where the pre-salt reservoirs are probably related to hydrothermal activity generating travertine-like rocks 3. The evaporitic model Farias et al., 2019 Although nowadays there are many efforts trying to explain the origin of these pre-salt reservoir facies, their full understanding will continue to be controversial and many uncertainties remain unresolved. According to our observations, in the Bu zios Field, it is likely that biotic and abiotic mechanisms are operating together in the generation of the pre-salt reservoirs but with different degree of participation. Based on limited field core data and thin sections, the biotic process seems to be a secondary factor based on the scarcity of microbialites and stromatolites facies. CONCLUSIONS The pre-salt province, located in deep to ultra-deep water of the Santos and Campos basins, contains giant world-class field discoveries in Aptian lacustrine carbonates reservoirs, placing Brazil into the top 10 oil-producing countries in the world. The Bu zios Field is a supergiant oil and gas field that has the largest OIP volume estimates of all the known pre-salt fields and is currently the second- largest hydrocarbon producer in Brazil by production rate. The field is not yet fully developed, and when the production plan is fully completed, it is expected to reach a production rate estimated at 900,000 BOE day and, therefore, expected to eclipse the hydrocarbon production rate of any other producing field in Brazil. Bu zios Field Geological Setting of the Largest Pre-Salt Field, Santos Basin, Brazil 393 The deposition of the pre-salt reservoirs in Bu zios Itapema and Barra Velha started during the late-rift and continued to evolve, reaching its climax during the subsequent post-rift stage. The pre-salt deposits are very complex in terms of reservoir architecture, composition, and areal distribution, and they are extremely influenced by the basin s tectonic setting and history. Studies of lacustrine carbonate reservoir rocks in continental rifts have been attracting significant interest around the world since the first Brazilian presalt discovery in 2006 Tupi Field, now Lula Field . The understanding of pre-salt reservoirs has become a challenge because most of the existing facies and tectono-stratigraphic models for carbonates are based on marine systems, whereas models for continental carbonates are relatively rare. Currently, there is a large controversy about the pre-salt reservoirs origin, and several models have been debated in the geological literature. The Brazilian pre-salt frontier plays are pushing the technological boundaries in the hydrocarbon exploration and production of the oil industry. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank ANP for providing the data used in this study. We also would like to extend our gratitude to Edward Cavallerano for discussion and insights about text format, to Vanessa Kertznus Shell Brasil for her support and motivation, and to Wagner Peres and Marcio Rocha Mello for their comments and revisions that greatly improved the manuscript. REFERENCES CITED ANP, 2016, Suma rio executivo do plano de desenvolvimento de Bu zios, accessed November 20, 2019, http www .anp.gov.br images EXPLORACAO E PRODUCAO DE OLEO E GAS Gesta o Contratos Fase Produc a o Planos Desenvolvimento sumario bu zios.pdf. ANP, 2020, Boletim da Produc a o de Petro leo e Ga s Natural, Janeiro, no. 113, 36 p. Berman, A., 2008, Three super-giant fields discovered in Brazil s Santos Basin World Oil, February, p. 23 24. Bonsence, D., K. Gibbons, D. P. Le Heron, W. A. Morgan, T. Pritchard, and B. A. M. Vining, 2015, Microbial carbonates in space and time Introduction London, Geological Society Special Publication 418, p. 1 15. Carminatti, M., B. Wolff, and L. A. P. Gamboa, 2008, New exploratory frontiers in Brazil 19th World Petroleum Congress, Madrid, Spain, WPC Proceedings, Abstracts CD, 11 p. Chang, H. K., M. L. Assine, F. S. Corre a, J. S. Tinen, A. C. Vidal, and L. Koike, 2008, Sistemas petroli feros e modelos de acumulac a o de hidrocarbonetos na Bacia de Santos Revista Brasileira de Geocie ncias, v. 38, no. 2, p. 29 46. Clifton, A. E., R. W. Schlische, M. O. Withjack, and R. V. A ckermann, 2000, Influence of rift obliquity on fault- population systematics Results of experimental clay models Journal of Structural Geology, v. 22, no. 10, p. 1491 1509, DOI 10.1016 S0191-8141 00 00043-2. Dehler, N. M., L. P. Magnavita, L. C. Gomes, C. A. Rigoti, J. A. B. de Oliveira, M. V. Sant Anna, and F. G. D. da Costa, 2016, The Helmut geophysical anomaly A regional left-lateral transtensional shear zone system connecting Santos and Campos basins, southeastern Brazil Marine and Petroleum Geology, v. 72, p. 412 422, DOI 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2016.01.012. Della Porta, G., F. Barilaro, and M. Ripamonti, 2012, Non- marine carbonates Microbially mediated vs. abiotic fabrics and porosity AAPG Hedberg Conference Microbial Carbonate Reservoir Characterization, Houston, Texas, June 3 8, 2012, Digital Abstract, accessed December 2, 2020, http www.searchanddiscovery.com pdfz abstracts pdf 2012 90153hedberg abstracts ndx della02.pdf.html. Dias, J. L., 2005, Tecto nica, estratigrafia e sedimentac a o no Andar Aptiano da margem leste brasileira Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, v. 13, no. 1, p. 7 25. Farias, F., P. Szatimari, A. Bahniuk, and A. B. Franc a, 2019, Evaporitic carbonates in the pre-salt of Santos Basin Genesis and tectonic implications Marine and Petroleum Geology, v. 105, p. 251 272, DOI 10.1016 j . marpetgeo.2019.04.020. Freitas, V. A., 2019, Bacia de Santos, Semina rio Te cnico da 16a Rodada de licitac o es de blocos para explorac a o e produc a o de petro leo e ga s natural, accessed March 20, 2020, http rodadas.anp.gov.br pt concessao-de-blo cos-exploratorios-1 16-rodada-de-licitacao-de-bloco seminarios. Gamboa, L. A. P., M. A. P. Machado, D. P. Silveira, J. T. R. Freitas, and S. R. P. Silva, 2009, Evaporitos estratificados no Atla ntico Sul interpretac a o si smica e controle tectono-estratigra fico na Bacia de Santos, in W. Mohriak, P. S zatmari, and S. M. C. Anjos, eds., Sal Geologia e Tecto nica, 2nd ed. Sa o Paulo, Editora Beca, p. 343 361. Gomes, P. O., B. Kilsdonk, T. Grow, J. Minken, and R. Barragan, 2012, Tectonic evolution of the Outer High of Santos Basin, southern Sa o Paulo Plateau, Brazil, and implications for hydrocarbon exploration, in D. Gao, ed., Tectonics and sedimentations Implications for petroleum systems AAPG Memoir 100, p. 125 142, DOI 10.1306 13351550M100.3530. Huc, A. Y., 2004, Petroleum in the South Atlantic Oil Gas Science and Technology Rev. IFP, v. 59, no. 3, p. 243 253, DOI 10.2516 ogst 2004017. Karner, G. D., 2000, Rifts of the Campos and Santos basins, southeastern Brazil Distribution and timing, in M. R. Mello and B. J. Katz, eds., Petroleum systems of South Atlantic margins AAPG Memoir 73, p. 301 315. Karner, G. D., and N. W. Driscoll, 1999, Tectonic and stratigraphic development of the West African and eastern Brazilian Margins Insights from quantitative basin 394 TAVARES ET AL. modelling, in N. R. Cameron, R. H. Bate, and V. S. Clure, eds., The oil gas habitats of the South Atlantic London, G eological Society Special Publications 153, p. 11 40, DOI 10.1144 GSL.SP.1999.153.01.02. Kumar, N., A. Danforth, P. Nuttall, J. Helwig, D. E. Bird, and S. Venkatraman, 2012, From oceanic crust to exhumed mantle A 40 year 1970 2010 perspective on the nature of crust under the Santos Basin, SE Brazil, in W. U. Mohriak, A. Danforth, P. J. Post, D. E. Brown, G. C. Tari, M. Nemcok, and S. T. Sinha, eds., Conjugate divergent margins London, Geological Society Special Publication 369, p. 147 165. McClay, K. R., T. Dooley, P. Whitehouse, and M. Mills, 2002, 4-D evolution of rift systems Insights from scaled physical models AAPG Bulletin, v. 86, no. 6, p. 935 959, DOI 10.1306 61EEDBF2-173E-11D7-8645000102C1865D. Meisling, K. E., P. R. Cobbold, and V. S. Mount, 2001, Segmentation of an obliquely rifted margin, Campos and Santos basins, southeastern Brazil AAPG Bulletin, v. 85, no. 11, p. 1903 1924, DOI 10.1306 8626D0B3-173B-11D78645000102C1865D. Mello, M. R., W. Peres, S. P. Rostirolla, O. A. Pedrosa Jr., A. Piquet, S. Becker, and P. O. Yilmaz, 2021a, The Santos Basin pre-salt supergiant petroleum system An incredible journey from failure to success, in Marcio R. Mello, Pinar O. Yilmaz, and Barry J Katz, eds., The supergiant Lower Cretaceous pre-salt petroleum systems of the Santos Basin, Brazil AAPG Memoir 124, p. 1 32. Mello, M. R., S. P. Rostirolla, V. Elias, M. Ferreira, A. P. Ahualli, S. Becker, J. E. Dahl, and J. M. Moldowan, 2021b, Lacustrine source rocks and oil systems present in the Lower Cretaceous pre-salt section of the Santos Basin, Brazil, in Marcio R. Mello, Pinar O. Yilmaz, and Barry J Katz, eds., The supergiant Lower Cretaceous pre-salt petroleum systems of the Santos Basin, Brazil AAPG Memoir 124, p. 33 74. Mohriak, W. U., 2001, Salt tectonics, volcanic centers, f racture zones and their relationship with the origin and evolution of the South Atlantic Ocean Geophysical evidence in the Brazilian and West African margins 7th International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society, Salvador, Bahia, Brazil, v. 28, p. 31. Mohriak, W. U., 2015, Pre-salt carbonate reservoirs in the South Atlantic and world-wide analogs AAPG Search and Discovery Digital Article 51086, accessed December 2, 2020, http www.searchanddiscovery.com pdfz documents 2015 51086mohriak ndx mohriak.pdf.html. Moreira, J. L. P., C. M. Madeira, J. A. Gil, and M. A. P. Machado, 2007, Bacia de Santos Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, Rio de Janeiro, v. 15, no. 2, p. 531 549. Morley, C. K., 1999, Aspects of transfer zone geometry and evolution in East African Rifts, in C. K. Morley, ed., Geoscience of rift systems evolution of East Africa AAPG Studies in Geology 44, p. 161 171. Muniz, M. C., 2013, Tectono-stratigraphic evolution of the Barremian-Aptian continental rift carbonates in southern Campos Basin, Brazil, Ph.D. thesis, Royal Holloway University of London, London, 343 p. Petersohn, E., 2019, Pre-salt super play Leading B razil into the world s top 5 oil suppliers AAPG Search and Discovery Digital Article 30625, DOI 10.1306 30625 Petersohn2019. Petersohn, E., and M. Abelha, 2013, Libra Avaliac a o Geolo gica Technical Seminar, Brasil pre-salt 1 presentation, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil, 21 de Outubro, 101 p. Pietzsch, R., D. M. Oliveira, L. R. Tedeschi, J. V. Queiroz Neto, M. F. Figueiredo, J. C. Vazquez, and R. S. Souza, 2018, Palaeohydrology of the Lower Cretaceous presalt lacustrinesystem, from rift to post-rift phase, Santos B asin, Brazil Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatolology, Palaeoecology, v. 507, p. 60 80. Rigoti, C. A., 2015, Evoluc a o tecto nica da Bacia de Santos com e nfase na geometria crustal Interpretac a o integrada de dados de si smica de reflexa o e refrac a o, gravimetria e magnetometria, Ph.D. thesis, State of Rio de Janeiro University, Rio de Janeiro, 129 p. Saller, A., S. Rushton, L. Buambua, K. Inman, R. McNeil, and J. A. D. T. Dickson, 2016, Presalt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola AAPG Bulletin, v. 100, no. 7, p. 1135 1164, DOI 10.1306 02111615216. Schaller, H., 1969, Revisa o estratigra fica da bacia Sergipe Alagoas Boletim Te cnico da Petrobras, v. 12, no. 1, p. 221 286. Schmitt R. S., R. A. J. Trouw, W. R. Van Schmus, and C. W. Passchier, 2008, Cambrian orogeny in the Ribeira belt Se Brazil and correlation within West Gondwana Ties that bind underwater, in R. J. Pankhurst, R. A. J. Trouw, B. B. Brito Neves, and M. J. de Wit, eds., West Gondwana pre-Cenozoic correlations across the South Atlantic region London, Geological Society Special Publication 294, p. 279 296. Szatmari, P., 2000, Habitat of petroleum along the South A tlantic margins, in M. R. Mello and B. J. Katz, eds., P etroleum systems of South Atlantic margins AAPG Memoir 73, p. 69 75, DOI 10.1306 M73705C6. Szatmari, P., J. C. Conceic a o, M. C. Lana, E. J. Milani, and A. P. Lobo, 1984, Mecanismo tecto nico do rifteamento sul-atla ntico 33th Congresso Brasileiro de Geologia, v. 4, p. 1589 1601. Thompson, D. L., J. D. Stilwell, and M. Hall, 2015, Lacustrine carbonate reservoirs from early Cretaceous rift lakes of Western Gondwana Pre-salt coquinas of Brazil and West Africa Gondwana Research, v. 28, no. 1, p. 26 51, DOI 10.1016 j.gr.2014.12.005. Wright, V. P., 2019, The pre-salt reservoirs of South Atlantic GEO Expro, v. 16, no. 4, p. 28 31. Wright, V. P., and A. J. Barnett, 2015, An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates, in D. W. J. Bosence, K. A. Gibbons, D. P. Le Heron, W. A. Morgan, T. Pritchard, and B. A. Vining, eds., Microbial carbonates in space and time Implications for global exploration and production London, Geological Society Special Publication 418, p. 209 219, DOI 10.1144 SP418.3.

[END_OF_PAPER]

Marine and Petroleum Geology 180 2025 107455 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Marine and Petroleum Geology journal homepage www.elsevier.com locate marpetgeo Integrated 3D forward stratigraphic and basin modeling of the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil Implications of sedimentary depositional facies and CO2 migration for silicification of continental carbonate reservoirs Alina-Berenice Christ a, , Marie-Christine Cacas-Stentz a , Nathalie Collard a, Fadi Henri Nader a , Elisabeth Bemer a , Rodrigo Branda o Bunevich b, Joa o Paulo Borges Gomes b, Olinto Gomes de Souza Jr. b , Maria Anna Abreu de Almeida dos Reis b a b IFP Energies nouvelles, 1 4 Av. de Bois Pre au, 92852 Rueil Malmaison, France Petrobras S.A., Av. Henrique Valadares 28, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 20231-030, Brazil A B S T R A C T Silicification plays an important role in the quality of pre-salt reservoirs, resulting in significant heterogeneities that are difficult to predict. A better understanding of the distribution of silicified pre-salt reservoirs at the basin scale helps in mapping such heterogeneities and further optimizing responsible hydrocarbon exploration and production. Here we investigate a scenario involving the interaction of an internal silica source from Mg-rich clay sedimentary depositional facies and CO2-rich fluid upwelling along deep-rooted faults. These are some of the main controlling factors of silicification, as confirmed with conceptual and numerical geochemical modeling. We present a new modeling workflow integrating forward stratigraphic modeling FSM , basin thermal modeling, quantitative chemical modeling, and map-based analysis to derive silicification probability maps of the Barra Velha Formation in the Santos Basin Brazil . FSM simulates, with a process-based approach, the sediment distribution in the Barra Velha Formation including Mg-rich clay. Basin thermal modeling simulates the rock-fluid systems evolution, CO2 migration, accumulation, and concentration in the formation. Geochemical modeling provides Mg-clay transformation ratios depending on Mg-clay content of rock matrix and CO2 concentration. Combining all elements together enables calculation of basin scale silicification probability maps across the study area. Highest probability of silicification is found above uplifted areas known to include Mg-rich clay, intense faulting, and trapping structures. 1. Introduction Silicification is a diagenetic process that affects carbonate aquifers and reservoirs by concurrent dissolution of calcium carbonate and pre cipitation of silica, further complexifying the mineralogic heterogeneity of the host rocks and the associated flow properties Bustillo, 2010 . Such processes have been extensively reported in the pre-salt conti nental carbonate reservoirs of the Brazilian margin Fig. 1 , whereby not only calcium carbonate, but also the magnesium-clay Mg-rich clay rock constituents are demonstrated to be replaced by silica Lima et al., 2020 Pereira et al., 2023 . The silicified pre-salt carbonates are also known to host world-class petroleum systems Beltrao et al., 2009 Jones and Chaves, 2011 Petersohn, 2019 . Silicification is also believed to have affected other similar reservoirs, such as those of the Kwanza basin on the African continental margin Saller et al., 2016 . While previous studies aimed at better understanding the implications of diagenetic processes, such as silicification Almeida Carvalho et al., 2022 , on the associated evolution of the reservoir characteristics Lima et al., 2020 Pereira et al., 2023 , often by means of various analytical and static modeling methods Nader, 2017 , no predictive process-based basin- scale mapping of silicification has been done. Previous approaches are essential to understand the controlling factors of such processes and provide the basics for constructing predictive numerical models to delineate the spatial and temporal distribution of silicification across sedimentary basins and reservoirs, especially when only few sub-surface data are available. The Barra Velha Formation includes broadly silicified reservoir zones as well as major hydrocarbon reservoirs Lima et al., 2020 Vieira, 2021 Vieira de Luca et al., 2017 . Silicified intervals are also affected by important carbonate dissolution e.g., vuggy, hypogenic karst , increasing considerably reservoir potentials. Previous studies demon strated the relationship between silicification and dissolution processes in the Barra Velha Formation and its analogs, suggesting strati graphically controlled fluid flow and fluid-rock interactions in deep burial diagenetic environments and or under hydrothermal conditions Basso et al., 2023 Souza et al., 2018 . The sources of dissolved silica at Corresponding author. E-mail address alina-berenice.christ ifpen.fr A.-B. Christ . https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2025.107455 Received 20 June 2024 Received in revised form 17 February 2025 Accepted 6 May 2025 Available online 8 May 2025 0264-8172 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license http creativecommons.org licenses by 4.0 . A.-B. Christ et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 180 2025 107455 the origin of the observed silicified rock facies are not well constrained and could be multiple. Some authors associated the silica supply with the alteration of volcanic products occurring in catchment areas, lakes, or the subsurface through hydrothermal activity Pietzsch et al., 2020 Szatmari and Milani, 2016 Teboul et al., 2017, 2019 Tosca and Wright, 2015 . Serpentinization of exhumed continental mantle has also been suggested as a source of solutes, including silica Pinto et al., 2017 Teboul et al., 2019 . Alternatively, the alteration of Mg-clays has been suggested to be the main source of Mg2 and SiO2 aq. for the silicifica tion and dolomitization of in pre-salt deposits Deocampo, 2005 Tosca and Wright, 2015 since Mg-clays are known to be chemically labile and prone to rapid destabilization and dissolution during diagenesis Tosca, 2014 Tosca and Wright, 2015 . In the case of an internal silica source, understanding the initial sediment mineralogy distribution as well as the fluid properties and circulation via deeply rooted faults is essential to identify the most likely areas of silica precipitation. Several phases of silicification are reported from petrographic anal ysis and proposed paragenesis Sartorato et al., 2020 Vieira, 2021 . In this contribution, we propose that the destabilization of Mg-rich clays was the major driver for this first and most significant phase, which is preceding hydrocarbon charge and the arrival of organic acids. The major CO2 charge of the basin is assumed to be mantellic in origin de Freitas et al., 2022 . Based on this hypothesis, we deduce that the sig nificant dissolution particularly of carbonates happened after the first phase of silicification. The CO2 generated from organic matter maturation, hydrocarbons and organic acids may have also contributed to the dissolution of Mg-rich clays, silicification and carbonate dissolu tion. Their impact is considered minor compared to the first phase of silicification and consequently we did not take those processes into ac count. Hydrocarbon generation, migration and accumulation were still calculated in our model, but we did not consider hydrocarbon fluid-rock interactions. The main objective of this study is to apply a new integrative workflow to predict the spatial distribution of silicification and its timing at the basin scale Fig. 2 . Our approach combines different nu merical modeling technologies to simulate, in three dimensions, the evolution of the basin over time, including stratigraphy, burial, pressure and temperature, salinity, CO2 migration, hydrocarbon generation and charge, as well as diagenesis i.e., carbonate silicification . We applied this workflow on the Santos basin offshore Brazil to demonstrate its feasibility and its ability to provide probable silicification maps across the basin. First, Forward Stratigraphic Modeling FSM, which simulates sedimentation processes was applied together with sensitivity analysis modeling. Then Basin Thermal Modeling was used to simulate the coupled transfers of fluids, heat, and chemicals. Results of the principal process-based simulators were combined with the output of a quanti tative geochemical simulation of the main parameters controlling silic ification Collard et al., 2023 to process map-based analysis and produce silification probability maps Fig. 2 . 2. Geological setting The Santos Basin is one of the largest sedimentary basins along the Brazilian continental margin with a surface area of 352 000 km2 and a water depth of up to 3000m Fig. 1 . It is bounded to the south by the Floriano polis platform, which forms its natural boundary with the Pe lotas basin. To the north, the Cabo Frio High separates it from the Campos basin. These passive-margin basins were formed in a Late Jurassic to Early Cretaceous extensional regime during the breakup of the Gondwana supercontinent, which led to the opening of the South Atlantic Ocean Chang et al., 1990 Mohriak et al., 2008 . They are therefore also related to the Kwanza and Namibe basins offshore southwest Africa Saller et al., 2016 . The tectono-stratigraphic evolution of the Santos basin is repre sented by three mega-sequences that are associated to a rift phase 138 123 My , a post-rift sag phase 123 113 My and a drift phase 113 0 My Moreira et al., 2007 . These phases and related mega-sequences are also characterized by major unconformities the Pre -Alagoas unconformity, which separates the rift and sag phases, the Intra-Alagoas unconformity, and the salt base which marks the transi tion from the sag to the drift phase Fig. 3 . The early rifting phase was characterized by extension and asthenospheric uplift Mckenzie, 1978 White and Mckenzie, 1988 , giving rise to tholeiitic flood basalts Mohriak et al., 2008 Torsvik et al., 2009 Turner et al., 1994 dated at 134 122 My Mizusaki et al., 1988 . The rift phase is dominated by fluvio-lacustrine deposits, talc-stevensite ooids with interlayered lacustrine coquinas and organic-rich shales of the Pic arras and Itapema formations Moreira et al., 2007 . These are overlain by the regional Pre -Alagoas unconformity, formed by previous uplift and erosion of the rift section Dias, 2005 Karner and Driscoll, 1999 Winter et al., 2007 . Thermal contraction of the crust resulted in subsidence and the collapse of crustal domes, creating sag-type basins Beasley et al., 2010 . This sag phase is characterized by the deposition of stromatolites, microbalites and Mg-rich shales in a lacustrine Fig. 1. a Location of the Santos Basin, South Atlantic, offshore Brazil. b Area of interest within the region of the outer high of the Santos Basin. c Close-up of the area of interest with the well locations. Modified from Melo-Garcia et al. 2012 . Satellite image from Google EarthTM 2025 . 2 A.-B. Christ et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 180 2025 107455 Fig. 2. The integrative modeling workflow designed and applied for this study. Rectangular boxes representing data and oval shapes representing modeling processes. Fig. 3. Lower Cretaceous stratigraphic chart of the Santos Basin, Brazil. Chart modified from Moreira et al. 2007 . environment, forming the Barra Velha Formation Mann and Rigg, 2012 Moreira et al., 2007 Terra et al., 2010 . During the drift phase the Santos basin became a passive margin, and the development of oceanic crust established a marine environment Aslanian et al., 2009 Chang et al., 1990, 1992 Moreira et al., 2007 . The Ariri Formation, overlying the Barra Velha Formation, is characterized by transitional evaporites deposited in a gulf type environment with highly saline waters and a negative hydrologic balance Chang et al., 1992 . It forms a regional seal up to 2 km thick Beasley et al., 2010 Mohriak et al., 2008 Moreira et al., 2007 Quirk et al., 2013 . Previous studies demonstrated that the Outer High area central part of Santos basin Fig. 1 was already a paleo-high at the time of the deposition of the Barra Velha Formation Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al., 2017 . The lake deposits in the Barra Velha Formation as well as the equivalent formations offshore Brazil are in a rift basin, whereby horsts and grabens prevailed with associated small islands, surrounded by large or small lakes, whose connectivity may have varied trough time Pietzsch et al., 2018 . The shoreline through which detrital input took place was far away to the west Dias, 2005 , whereas the in-situ car bonate deposits appear to be laterally continuous for many kilometers Carminatti et al., 2008 . These carbonates are often characterized by three main textural components shrubstones, spherulitestones and fine micritic material Wright and Barnett, 2015 . 2.1. Facies types of Barra Velha Formation BVF Different facies types have been identified in the pre-salt deposits of the Barra Velha Formation in the Santos Basin and their equivalents can be found in the adjacent Campos and Pelotas basins Lima and De Ros, 2019 , as well as the Namibian and Kwanza basins Saller et al., 2016 . Gomes et al. 2020 distinguish three in situ formed end member facies types based on the detailed analysis of eight wells and 389 m of core 3 A.-B. Christ et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 180 2025 107455 data mud dolomite, calcite, silica and Mg-rich clay , calcite spheru lites, and fascicular calcite shrubs. When the spherulites and shrubs were subject to erosion and transport, their debris can form a fourth facies type, referred to as the reworked facies. The mud end member is composed of different clay minerals e.g., kerolite, stevensite, saponite, illite and mixed-layer minerals kerolite smectite and illite smectite Madrucci et al., 2019 Souza et al., 2018 . Creamy to light brown in color, it shows massive beds or plane-parallel to smooth wavy laminations with thicknesses varying from a few mm to cm. Clay minerals and carbonate mud are locally replaced by dolomite and microcrystalline silica. Lighter laminas appear to be composed of microcrystalline calcite and darker laminas are composed of micro crystalline and rhombohedral dolomite and organic matter. Siliciclastic grains, ostracod and phosphatic particles are also found in the mud Gomes et al., 2020 . Spherulites are spherical calcite aggregates with a radial structure that are commonly dolomitized or recrystallized. Gomes et al. 2020 measured spherulites on thin sections and calculated a diameter range of 0.1 4 mm with a mean of 1 mm and a mode of 0.6 mm. Due to the small variance in size, the same formation mechanisms are assumed for all examined spherulites. A nucleus in the center is rarely identified which may be cryptocrystalline micrite, clay minerals or ostracods. The orig inal fibrous appearance is mostly preserved but it can be lost due to chalcedony and microquartz replacement. The spherulites seem to favor an upward growth but in special cases the spherulites can grow parallel to the bedding. Intermediate forms between spherulites and shrubs also exist. The term shrub refers to very coarse-bladed calcite crystal crusts in a fan-like structure that show perpendicular grow along an axis pointing away from the substrate from which they originate Folk et al., 1985 . Gomes et al. 2020 found that the long axis of the shrubs in the Barra Velha Formation is between 0.15 and 6.5 mm. They grow in a parallel fashion with distances between individual shrub axes ranging from 0.2 to 4 mm, and occasionally contain fine detrital material. The shrubs form horizontal layers and can locally form dome-like structures Rezende and Pope, 2015 Terra et al., 2010 Wright and Barnett, 2015 . Occasionally shrubs can exhibit multiple growth phases resulting in composite shrubs as large as 20 mm. action and currents Arienti et al., 2018 Artaga o, 2018 Ceraldi and Green, 2017 Gomes et al., 2020 Herlinger et al., 2017 Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al., 2017 Lima and De Ros, 2019 Muniz and Bosence, 2015 Sartorato, 2018 Tanaka et al., 2018 Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2017 . The presence of the mud matrix suggests that transport did not occur Herlinger et al., 2017 . Spherulites most likely formed at the sediment-water interface in an alkaline environment rich in dissolved organic acids Mercedes-Marti n et al., 2016 . One possibility could be that the spherulites of the Barra Velha Formation formed around bac terial clumps present in the water column, and then slowly settled down until they reached the sediment-water interface Gomes et al., 2020 , where they continued their spherical incremental growth pattern like the mechanism proposed for other alkaline lake systems Mercedes-Marti n et al., 2017 . Reworked sediments are found at the paleo-highs, interfingering with intervals of shrubs and spherulites but also farther from the highs in the more basin dominated areas. The reworked sediments are the debris of shrubs and spherulites created during episodes of lower lake levels causing erosion and was transported away from the paleo-highs by gravitational currents. Away from the paleo-highs, laminated micrite and Mg-rich clays dominate in the paleo-lows . Due to their small grain size, both sedi ments require a low energy environment to settle down, below the wave base. They are interpreted to have formed in the deeper and undisturbed parts of the lacustrine environment. Near to the paleo-highs, some areas are locally characterized by some amounts of preserved Mg-rich clays. Protection from wave energy in localized smaller basins paleo-lows could have allowed Mg-rich clay to accumulate there, suggesting that they can still occur at shallow water depths but require a low energy environment. 2.3. Tectonic and climatic controlling factors Tectonic and climatic cycles as well as sea level fluctuations are inter-related and have a tremendous impact on sediment erosion, transport, deposition, and accommodation space. They are the major controlling factors and drivers for the creation of different depositional environments in sedimentary basins Catuneanu et al., 2009 Mack, 1978 Nichols, 2009 . Tectonics and eustasy affect the accommodation space of the basin, which is the space available for sediments to accu mulate over time. Climate on the other hand has a more indirect effect on the accommodation by controlling the sediment available for depo sition. For example, it limits the amount of sediment that can be trans ported into the basin or the rate of growth of biogenic sediments. Other factors such as wave energy or currents are also determined by climate Catuneanu et al., 2009 . Eustatic sea level fluctuations are controlled by both tectonics and climate on different time scales. On the larger strat igraphic orders third stratigraphic order and above , the driving factor is tectonic mechanisms such as continental formation and break up or regional plate kinematics. Time scales for sea level changes range from 200 to 400 My first stratigraphic order , to 1 10 My third stratigraphic order . For smaller stratigraphic orders cycles fourth and fifth strati graphic orders global climatic changes e.g., caused by Milankovitch cycles with duration of 0.01 1 My are the main driving force Catuneanu et al., 2009 Miall, 2000 Vail et al., 1977 . The cyclical deposition of the Barra Velha Formation facies described above has been observed and associated to the interplay between tectonic and climatic cycles affecting the Santos basin Arienti et al., 2018 Artaga o, 2018 Dias, 2005 Farias et al., 2019 Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al., 2017 Lima and De Ros, 2019 Muniz and Bosence, 2015 Sartorato, 2018 Wright and Barnett, 2015 . The basin-wide un conformities that bound the Barra Velha Formation at the top Salt base and bottom Pre -Alagoas , and internally Intra-Alagoas represent such interplay and were used to further subdivide the stratigraphic units. For example, the Intra-Alagoas Unconformity divides the Barra Velha For mation in a Lower Barra Velha Formation and an Upper Barra Velha 2.2. Conceptual sedimentological model The relief of the Outer High central part of Santos basin, Fig. 1 was very similar to what can be seen today on seismic reflection profiles Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al., 2017 , allowing the definition of two distinct types of depositional environments i.e., paleo-highs and adja cent paleo-lows that are also supported by lithological information from well data Fig. A1a . Due to such relief configuration, the condi tions for sedimentary deposition differed in terms of bathymetry, but also in terms of other sediment control factors such as wave energy. The depositional environment of the paleo-highs is strongly influ enced by lake level fluctuations and even shows signs of exposure during lake level low stands Gomes et al., 2020 . The paleo-highs are domi nated by the presence of shrubs that grew in an upward, vertical di rection from a substratum Basso et al., 2020 . They are found in their in-situ position, indicating that they were not transported. Shrubs form horizontal layers and locally low domal structures Rezende and Pope, 2015 Terra et al., 2010 Wright and Barnett, 2015 . Biological factors may play a role in the initiation of shrub growth, invoking growth in a shallow water depth, in the range of the photic zone Ceraldi and Green, 2017 Gomes et al., 2020 . Shrubs also require wave energy for their development. In the Kwanza basin, very similar facies to shrubs have been observed and have been interpreted to have formed positive structures on paleo-highs, like modern reefs, requiring both light and wave energy for their development Saller et al., 2016 . Spherulites are also present on the paleo-highs, but they indicate a higher lake level during the time of deposition, protected from wave 4 A.-B. Christ et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 180 2025 107455 Formation. The sequences have been dated using ostracods and span a time frame of about 10 My 123 113 My as well as deposited sequence thicknesses of several 100 s m Gomes et al., 2020 Moreira et al., 2007 Pietzsch et al., 2018 . These sequences correspond to third-order stratigraphic cycles, suggesting a tectonic origin. A general change in lithology can be observed from the Lower Barra Velha For mation to the Upper Barra Velha Formation. The Lower Barra Velha Formation is largely dominated by Mg-rich clays, micrites and reworked facies, whereas the Upper Barra Velha Formation is mostly composed of in-situ formed sediments Gomes et al., 2020 . It is noteworthy that the Mg-rich clays increase just above the Intra-Alagoas Unconformity and decrease progressively towards the top. Basic repeating high frequency cycles have been identified in the Barra Velha Formation representing fourth to fifth order cycles, with the climate as the driving factor behind the formation of these cycles. Fourth order cycles are in the range of 100 400 ky and have a thickness of 10 50m. Eccentricity is considered to be the underlying cause. Fifth order cycles are in the range of 20 50 ky and have a thickness in the meter scale ranging between 1 and 10m . They are well identified on the lithology logs as shown by Gomes et al. 2020 . Obliquity and pre cession are thought to be the underlying mechanism causing these re petitive cycles. In an idealized sequence, a fourth-order cycle in the Barra Velha Formation starts out at the base with laminated carbonates deposited during the maximum lake level Fig. A1b . As the lake level decreases, alkalinity and microbial action increase, creating favorable conditions for the formation of mm-large spherulites Gomes et al., 2020 Mercedes-Marti n et al., 2017 . These are followed by mm-cm sized calcitic crystal shrubs and crusts Wright and Barnett, 2015 . When the lake level is at its lowest, previously deposited sediments may be exposed and reworked. Towards the top of an idealized cycle, grainstones composed mainly of fragments of previously deposited facies and absent of matrix complete the cycle, suggesting deposition in a high-energy environment Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al., 2017 . The reworked sediments due to their origin can occur at any time during a sequence and are therefore not a reliable component for calibration. 3. Data and methods The selected study area covers a 48 km 98 km rectangular zone on the Outer High in the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil Fig. 1 . The used dataset was compiled and provided by Petrobras. Hard input data for model construction were taken from three interpreted seismic horizons and seven wells with markers and lithological logs Fig. 4 . The seismic horizons available were the top and base of the Barra Velha Formation and the Intra-Alagoas Unconformity. The top and base of the Barra Velha Formation and the Intra-Alagoas Unconformity were also present as well markers. Formation boundaries were dated using the Moreira et al. 2007 stratigraphic chart which places the top of the Barra Velha For mation at 113 My, the Intra-Alagoas Unconformity at 117 My and the base of the Barra Velha formation at 122 My. The lithology classes were simplified by regrouping the 15 classes identified by Gomes et al. 2020 into five respective classes Table 2 . The applied workflow integrates, as mentioned above, process based modeling software packages as well as geochemical analysis solutions Fig. 4. Cross section for the seven available wells showing the lithology logs and the two unconformities bordering the Barra Velha Formation. Wells located at the flank of the paleo high show a predominance for Mg-rich clays, especially around the Intra-Alagoas Unconformity. The paleo high is dominated by shrubstone and spherulitestone. Reworked sediment occurs on the paleo high and flanks. BVF Barra Velha Formation, SBU Salt Base Unconformity, IAU Intra-Alagoas Unconformity, PAU Pre -Alagoas Unconformity. 5 A.-B. Christ et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 180 2025 107455 Fig. 2 . The forward stratigraphic model FSM , based on the concep tual sedimentological model and input data, provided realistic maps of the sedimentological facies distribution. These were used as an input data for the basin thermal model which provides a detailed prediction of the other parameters that are believed to control silicification over time, namely pressure, temperature, and CO2 concentration in water Collard et al., 2023 . The simulated facies maps, the basin modeling output maps namely that of CO2 distribution , together with the transformation ratios of clays to silica defined by means of geochemical modeling, see Collard et al., 2023 , were combined to produce through map-based analysis the silicification probability maps Fig. 2 . These steps are described in detail here below. model for each time step at a given interval. The result is a highresolution geologic model showing sedimentary distribution and facies architecture. The model can be used to quantify sedimentary processes through time for a specific location, providing a deeper understanding of geological evolution as was done in this study for the Barra Velha For mation of the Santos Basin, whereby the constructed model spatial resolution is 1 km 1 km with a time step of 0.25 million years My . Calibration is an essential part of numerical modeling to achieve a realistic result with comparison to available data. In this study, seismic reflection data interpreted horizons and thickness maps and well data were used to compare and adjust the simulation results. An important final step was the uncertainty and sensitivity analysis to identify most influential simulation parameters. 3.1. Forward stratigraphic modeling FSM 3.1.1. Input data for FSM The main input data for the forward stratigraphic model were sediment types with associated carbonate accumulation curves, see Fig. 5 , lake level variation curve, wave energy, gravitational sediment transportation, paleo bathymetry and subsidence maps Table 1 . The five sediment types were defined for the forward stratigraphic model to represent the known dominant BVF facies. In a post processing step after the initial simulation, facies types were defined based on pro portions of sediment types in the cells Table 3 . These facies types were used for calibration with the original well data. Forward stratigraphic modeling FSM is a 3D process-based approach to modeling geologic processes through time and space. Based on physical laws, FSM enables to model precise sedimentary facies distribution which is an important input parameter to better constrain basin thermal modeling. DionisosFlowTM, a software for stratigraphic forward modeling developed by IFP Energies nouvelles and BeicipFranlab was used in this study Granjeon, 1996 Granjeon and Joseph, 1999 . This software can simulate the production, transport, and accu mulation of different sediment types on basin scale 10 100 km and over long-time intervals 100 Ka 100 Ma . It was also used to model sedimentary systems below the fifth order Busson et al., 2019 Csato et al., 2014 Rabineau et al., 2005 , accounting for accommodation space variation by a fluctuation of an eustatic sea level curve and or by subsidence. It allows to model siliciclastic, carbonate and mixed sedi ments as well as the distribution of marine and terrestrial organic matter in different environments ranging from lacustrine and shallow marine to deep marine Andres et al., 2008 Bassant and Harris, 2008 Bruneau et al., 2018 Burgess et al., 2006 Claps et al., 2009 Granjeon and Jo seph, 1999 Hawie et al., 2015 Kolodka et al., 2016 Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al., 2017 Rabineau et al., 2005 Seard, 2010 Seard et al., 2013 Williams et al., 2011 . Sediment transport is simulated by an empirical diffusion equation that can be driven by gravity and or water Granjeon, 1996 Granjeon and Joseph, 1999 . Deposited sediments can be eroded again, e.g., by wave action. Once the process parameters are identified, the stratigraphic forward simulation calculates the sedimentary properties in each cell of the 3.1.1.1. From lithofacies to Sediment types . Stratigraphic forward models are constructed at the larger, basin scale resolution in time and space, as mentioned above. Detailed, smaller scale facies definition e.g., high resolution well-log description, microscopic analysis may be less relevant than the dominant end-member groups of facies e.g., muddominated, grain-dominated, in-situ sediments . This is important for stratigraphic modeling as it allows to focus the simulations on the dominant facies that ultimately create differential stratigraphic patterns. The detailed BVF facies described from seven well-logs Gomes et al., 2020 were regrouped into five dominant facies. The end-member facies of in-situ growing shrub and spherulite each containing more than 90 of shrub or spherulite were grouped into shrubstone and spherulite stone, respectively Table 2 . All facies containing less than 90 shrub or spherulite and less than 90 fine grain fraction were grouped into the facies Mg-rich mudstone Table 2 . Mud-dominated facies with a significant carbonate content calcite and dolomite were referred to as Fig. 5. Normalized carbonate production curves for the 4 sediment types shrub, spherulite, Mg-rich clay, and micrite. 6 A.-B. Christ et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 180 2025 107455 micrite characterize the flanks and basins. The Lower BVF, where basin and flank depositional environments prevail, is dominated by Mg-rich mudstone, micrite and reworked facies. The Upper BVF is dominated by shrubstone, spherulitestone and Mg-rich mudstone. Mg-clay is especially abundant above the Intra-Alagoas Unconformity. For FSM, these dominant facies correspond to a mixture with specific pro portions of sediment types that will be detailed below Section 3.1.1.7 . Table 1 List of the principal input parameters and their values used for forward strati graphic modeling FSM . Carbonate accumulation and sediment transformation rates based on Kinsey, 1985 Bosscher and Schlager, 1993 Tosca and Wright, 2014 Saller et al., 2016 Ceraldi and Green, 2017 Gomes et al., 2020 , wave energy parameters based on Gilbert, 1999 Saller et al., 2016 , sediment transport parameters based on Terra et al., 2010 Rezende and Pope, 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2015 Bruneau et al., 2017 Herlinger et al., 2017 Busson et al., 2019 Granjeon, 2019 Basso et al., 2020 Gomes et al., 2020 . Parameters Values Model size Cell dimension Time step Subsidence 48 km 98 km 1 km 1 km 0.25 My 30 80 m My on paleo high 50 250 m my in basin area 20 kW m Minimum wave energy threshold Wave base Carbonate accumulation rates Sediment transformation rate Gravitational diffusion coefficient Kslope Sediment type 3.1.1.2. Carbonate production accumulation model and sediment trans formation rates. Carbonate in-situ accumulation rates were calculated based on the age limits and thicknesses of the Upper and Lower BVF. They are in the range of 50 m Ma to 80 m Ma for the Lower BVF and increase to 80 m Ma to 120 m Ma in the Upper BVF see Table 1 , which is in the same order of magnitude observed in other carbonate systems in the geological record Bosscher and Schlager, 1993 . Carbonate accu mulation rates are not equivalent to carbonate production rates, which can be much higher and in the order of magnitude of 7 9 mm yr of recent coral reefs Kinsey, 1985 . This is because carbonate deposits can be again eroded and transformed after deposition. In this study, we focused on adjusting the carbonate accumulation rates of individual sediment types to match the observed thicknesses, distribution pat terns and well data of the Lower and Upper BVF. For the Lower BVF the following carbonate accumulation rates were used 50 m My for shrub, 50 m My for spherulite, 60 m My for Mg-rich clay, 80 m My for micrite. For the Upper BVF the following carbonate accumulation rates were used 120 m My for shrub, 100 m My for spherulite, 80 m My for Mg-rich clay, 80 m My for micrite. Normalized production curves as a function of water depth are shown in Fig. 5. Shrub growth was influenced by biological factors indicating for mation in shallow water depths in the photic zone requiring additionally wave energy for their development like modern reefs Saller et al., 2016 Ceraldi and Green, 2017 Gomes et al., 2020 . Therefore, the production zone was limited to the first 20m of the water column. An additional constraint in form of wave energy was added to the production of shrub and their production only happens in areas where wave energy exceeds 20 kW m. Spherulites are found on the palo-high in association with shrub and a Mg-rich mud matrix, which is why the production windows was set between the two other sediment types and below the fair-weather wave base. The Mg-rich clay production window is situated in the sublittoral zone of the lake below the spherulite window. They require high pH 9.5 for their formation and elevated methane levels and associated acidity due to organic sediment accumulation would prevent formation at deeper bathymetries Tosca and Wright, 2014 . Micrite is found mainly in the deeper bathymetries of the lake in the form of finely laminated clays, indicating deposition in a calm and un disturbed environment not influenced by waves or storms and repre senting a pelagic background sedimentation. Reworked sediments originate as debris from the erosion and break down of shrub and spherulite during episodes of low lake levels. Shrub and spherulite get transformed at a rate of 20 m My into reworked sediment to reflect this process. 10 m 50 120 m My 50 100 m My 60 80 m My 80 m My 20 m My Shrub Spherulite Mg-rich clay Micrite Shrub and spherulite transformed into reworked sediment Shrub Spherulite Mg-rich clay Micrite Reworked Sediment 0.0001 km2 ky 0.0001 km2 ky 0.001 km2 ky 0.001 km2 ky 0.001 km2 ky Table 2 Nomenclatures of the detailed well-log described facies of BVF, based on Gomes et al. 2020 and the corresponding five regrouped facies this study . BVF detailed Facies classification Regrouped dominant facies for FSM Spherulitestone Shrubby spherulitestone Spherulitic shrubstone Shrubstone Spherulitic shrubstone with mud Shrubby spherulitestone with mud Muddy spherulitestone Spherulitic mudstone Mg-clay mudstone Calci-mudstone Dolo-mudstone Mixed mudstone Grainstone Packstone Wackestone Spherulitestone Shrubstone Mg-rich mudstone Micrite Reworked Facies Table 3 Parameter definition for the lithofacies classes in the model. Sediment types Lithofacies classes Shrubstone Spherulitestone Mg-rich mudstone Micrite Reworked facies Shrub Spherulite 30 Mg-rich clay Reworked sediment 30 Micrite 30 30 3.1.1.3. Sea lake level curve. In this study the lake level curve was constructed from the lithology logs of representative wells for the paleohigh and paleo-low areas in the model. For each lithology type present in the logs, a relative lake level was assigned according to the conceptual depositional model. Lithologies associated with a deeper bathymetry during formation were assigned a number close to 1, and lithologies associated with shallower bathymetries were assigned values closer to 0 see Table A1 . Consequently, a relative lake level variation curve was obtained which depicts the tendencies of relative lake level deepening and shallowing. The curve was then readjusted to account for the time required for sediment deposition. The depositional time for the different lithologies varies depending on grain size and mode of formation. A time 30 micrite Table 2 . Grainstone, packstone, wackestone facies that are not formed in-situ were combined into reworked facies Table 2 . Shrubstone and spherulitestone characterize the paleo-high deposi tional environment, whereas reworked facies, Mg-rich mudstone and 7 A.-B. Christ et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 180 2025 107455 step of 0.1m was chosen and relative depositional rates were derived for each lithology Table A2 . Finally, the curve was normalized for a fluctuating lake level between 0 and 50m, where 50m is considered the maximum lake level to cover the production window for Mg-rich clays Fig. A2a . 3.1.1.8. Subsidence. Subsidence maps were calculated in a twofold step based on seismic horizon data, which was considered as hard data and has therefore not been modified. First, the accumulated sediment thickness was computed by subtracting bottom seismic horizon from top seismic horizon for the Upper BVF and the Lower BVF, respectively. Then, the maps were converted to time unit m My by dividing the thickness maps by their relative deposition time interval Fig. A4 . Subsidence is assumed linear for each modeled time interval. This simplification is minimizing the number of unknow factors and facili tates the correlation with the hard data. Calculated values for subsidence in the Lower BVF are 30 m My on the paleo high and 100 150 m My in the basin area. Calculated values for subsidence in the Upper BVF are 50 80 m My on the paleo high and 100 250 m My in the basin area. Sediment compaction was not considered, and no back-stripping was applied for the constructions of the incorporated subsidence maps in the stratigraphic model. 3.1.1.4. Wave energy. Wave energy is a critical factor in the develop ment of shrubstone and reworked facies Saller et al., 2016 . For com parable wind speeds, wave bases are shallower in lakes than in the ocean domain Gilbert, 1999 . A 1D wave model was chosen in which wave energy decreases from top to bottom and is a function of the bathymetry. The wave base was set at 10m and the wave energy is highest between 3 and 13m of bathymetry, reaching a peak of 40 kW m at 5m bathymetry Fig. A2b . 3.1.1.5. Paleo-topography. Paleo-topographic surfaces were used as boundary conditions for the forward stratigraphic simulation. They were reconstructed from associated seismic horizons, as previous research showed that the Pre-Salt field high was also a paleo-high throughout the Barra Velha Formation deposition Gomes et al., 2020 Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al., 2017 . Lithology logs were analyzed for the Pre-Salt field high and flanks, and the paleo-bathymetries were deduced Table A2 . Using the derived paleo-bathymetry information, a normalization factor was applied to the seismic horizons to create a paleo-topographic surface for each horizon Fig. A3 . 3.1.2. Uncertainty and sensitivity analysis of FSM Sensitivity analysis aims to better understand the uncertainty in the output of model simulations and assesses the impacts of various uncer tain input parameters on the modelling results. It allows for checking the robustness of the model when uncertainty is introduced, and for further understanding the relationship between the input parameters and the output of the model e.g., unexpected relationships may indicate errors . Through such analysis the parameters with the highest impacts on the modelling results can be distinguished and investigated furthermore. In this study the software CougarFlowTM Gervais et al., 2018 was used to get a global understanding on the sensitivity of the processes influencing the Mg-rich clay distribution. Based on the achieved FSM simulation, meta models were built for each parameter potentially influencing the simulation result using a Latin Hypercube Design. These meta models are in a second step used for uncertainty quantification and sensitivity analysis of the critical input parameters for the simulation. Latin Hypercube Design was chosen instead of performing a Monte Carlo sampling, due to its advantages in terms of computation time and cost. The whole simulation area was selected as a zone of interest for the uncertainty and sensitivity analysis. The average percentage of sediment type Mg-rich clay present in each cell of the simulation has been selected as the result of interest. An un certainty range 20 of the original simulation parameter was chosen. The following 7 parameters were tested for their impact in average Mgrich clay percentage eustasy, wave energy, subsidence, sediment transport, carbonate production versus time, carbonate production versus depth, and sediment transformation rate. The sensitivity analysis to determine the most influential parame ters is done by creating a multidimensional response surface in the parameter space, which honors the data exactly. In a next step, a mathematical response surface is generated, which is a mathematically reliable representation of all the parameter combinations. The fit be tween the multidimensional and the mathematical response surface shows the predictivity of the model and is expressed with a number between 0 and 1. The better the fit and values close to 1, the higher the predictivity and therefore robustness of the model. 3.1.1.6. Sediment transport. Sediment transport processes and parame ters were defined from an analysis of sedimentary paleoenvironments. The paleo-high is strongly influenced by lake level fluctuations and signs of exposure during lake level low stands can be found Gomes et al., 2020 . Shrub on the paleo-high grew from a substratum in an upward and vertical direction and forming horizontal layers with domal struc tures. Presence of in-situ position indicates no transport Basso et al., 2020 Rezende and Pope, 2015 Terra et al., 2010 Wright and Barnett, 2015 . The association of spherulite with a Mg-rich mud matrix also suggests that there was no transport after formation Herlinger et al., 2017 . Therefore, sediment transport is modeled following a linear diffusion gravitational transport law taking into consideration the local gradient of surface elevation z. The sediment flux in the model Qs is calculated following the equation Qs Kslope z The transport coefficient Kslope defines the efficiency of sediment transport and varies with the sediment type. The values for the coeffi cient Kslope were assumed very low to prevent the transport of shrub. In an iterative approach various order of magnitudes for the transport coefficient values were tested according to a range of values from the literature Bruneau et al., 2017 Busson et al., 2019 Granjeon, 2019 . The values for the coefficient Kslope were selected by an iterative approach so that the modeled sediment distribution fits the observed lithofacies data in the wells Table 1 . 3.1.1.7. Facies definition. In a forward stratigraphic model, each grid cell contains a mix of the simulated sediment types in percentage, which is a function of the parameters described above. Sediment per centage is a continuous parameter, and in this study, we are interested in lithofacies maps. Those maps show the distribution of lithofacies throughout the basin and at different ages - notably Mg-rich mudstone which contribute to the characterization of silicification probability. We designed a facies definition matrix which assigns to each cell one discrete facies value, based on the percentages of the sediment types present in each cell see Table 3 . A value of minimum 30 of the respective sediment type was chosen for the attribution of the lith ofacies class. 3.2. Basin thermal modeling Process-based forward numerical modeling of the major processes controlling heat and fluid transfer throughout the entire sedimentary basin and throughout its geological history was achieved using a prototype version of TemisFlowTM developed by IFP Energies nouvelles and Beicip-Franlab Schneider et al., 2000 . This technology has become a standard tool for oil and gas exploration and is now being used to address some of the challenges of the energy transition involving the deep subsurface. While stratigraphic modeling is used in this study to provide insight into the distribution of stratigraphic facies, basin modeling is used to predict the temporal evolution of other factors 8 A.-B. Christ et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 180 2025 107455 thought to control silicification like pressure and temperature. Salinity and CO2 concentration in water could also be simulated with a new prototype module for simulating the transfer of dissolved components and calculating the thermodynamic equilibrium between the aqueous and vapor phase. Special attention was given to the fault system which is precisely mapped in the study area, and which may be the pathways for the CO2-rich fluids. First, a basin-scale geomodel covering the area of interest is con structed Fig. 6 , which is calibrated against pressure and temperature data referred to as original model . The original model was updated to include results from FSM and is referred to as new model . The new model measures 60 km 100 km and is discretized with 250000 cells divided into 21 layers, each one corresponding to a depositional event. The pre-salt formations are discretized by 8 layers corresponding to the following time intervals 125Myrs 123 Myrs , 123Myrs 121 Myrs , 121Myrs 119 Myrs , 119Myrs 117 Myrs , 117Myrs 116.3 Myrs , 116.3Myrs 115.2 Myrs , 115.2Myrs 114.1 Myrs and 114.1Myrs 113 Myrs . The bounding box of the stratigraphic model described above delineates a subdomain of the new basin model and is hereafter referred to as the FSM sub-model . 3.2.1. Lithofacies distribution A lithofacies map was assigned to each layer of the model Fig. 7 . Lithofacies from the original model were not modified outside of the FSM subdomain. Five new lithofacies were used to model the spatial distribution of petrophysical properties within the FSM subdomain, corresponding to the five simplified facies used in the DionisosFlowTM model, namely spherulitestone, shrubstone, Mg-rich mudstone, micrite and reworked facies. Faults were added to the model according to available observations in a restricted area around the Pre-Salt field reservoir. Six other new facies were created to model the cells which are intersected by these faults Spherulitestone fractured, Shrubstone fractured, Mg-richmudstone fractured, Mudstone fractured, Micrite fractured and Reworked fractured. It is very likely that other faults exist in other areas of the basin, but no data were available. The dominant facies maps of the 8 pre-salt layers were then exported from DionisosFlowTM model and re-sampled onto the basin modeling Fig. 7. Facies map of the top pre-salt layer, deposited during the 114.1Myrs 113 Myrs time interval. The black dotted line represents the Pre-Salt field anticline axis. grid. The resulting lithofacies maps were completed by assigning the fractured lithofacies to the cells intersected by fault lineaments or above the Outer-High regional fault. Finally, a highly permeable lithofacies referred to as previous boundary in Fig. 7 was applied in one-cell-thick surfaces along the domain lateral boundaries and in all layers of the model to allow the expulsion of compaction fluids without the devel opment of overpressure as observed in the area. This method of pre venting overpressure was preferred to a simple hydrostatic boundary condition because it also prevents inflow of external fluid that could disturb the simulated salinity and CO2 concentration fields. 3.2.2. Petrophysical properties Assigning petrophysical properties to the different lithofacies of the model was a challenging problem because petrophysical measurements are made on samples that have been altered by diagenesis making them poorly representative of the rock properties before silicification. We assigned the petrophysical properties of the two porous sandstones of the original model to all lithofacies of the FSM subdomain, to preserve the good calibration of the original model. The Schneider model Schneider et al., 1996 is used for compaction, and the Kozeny-Carman model is used for the permeability versus porosity relationship. A correction factor of 0.001 was then applied to the permeability of the argillaceous lithofacies. Since faults were assumed to be the vectors for the upward migration of CO2, they were modeled as privileged flow paths, even though no data is available to confirm this hypothesis except that the CO2 content of the water observed in the Pre-Salt field reservoir is indeed high Jia et al., 2020 . We increased the vertical permeability of the cells intersected by fault lineaments or along the Outer-High regional fault by a factor of 10, considering that the damage zone fills 10 of the cell volume, with a permeability 100 times higher than in the undamaged rock. Fig. A5 shows the permeability maps of the pre-salt layer at 112 Myrs, in the original and in the new model. Once completed, the geomodel was back-stripped automatically according to the porosity versus depth curves assigned to each lithofacies. Fig. 6. General presentation of the basin model, a contour of the FSM submodel, b 2 cross-sections of the basin model colored by facies showing the model base in grey , pre-salt, salt in pink and post-salt in green , c basal surface of the basin model colored by the crustal CO2 flux. 3.2.3. Basin thermal simulations Physical processes included in the simulations were thermal 9 A.-B. Christ et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 180 2025 107455 evolution, two-phase fluid flow and compaction, as well as petroleum maturation, expulsion, and migration. These processes are part of the state-of-the-art basin thermal modeling, whereas modeling the trans port of dissolved salt and CO2 was achieved through an in-house pro totype described separately below . We applied a multiplication factor to the normalized CO2 production map. The CO2 production at the bottom of the sediments was held constant from the initial time of basin formation until 113.106 years, the time when rifting has ceased. After some trial and error, we set the maximum production to 7000 kg m2 106 years to observe a significant CO2 concentration in the Pre-Salt field reservoir, as is currently observed. This CO2 production is the maximum production flux we could find in the literature. It was obtained by combining the maximum mantle flux of crustal 3He proposed by Torgersen 1993 and the mantle 3 He CO2 ratio proposed by Marty and Jambon 1987 . The final CO2 production flux at the base of the sediments is shown in Fig. 6. 3.2.3.1. Forward simulations of temperature, two-phase flow and compaction, and the petroleum system. Temperature is an important parameter to simulate because it controls CO2 solubility and most geochemical reactions at depth including thermogenic hydrocarbon production. It also controls fluid viscosity and fluid density, and hence, fluid flow. For this study, we applied a time-varying heat flux map at the base of the model, extracted from the original model. In the latter, the thermal model simulated the thermal coupling between the sediments and the crust during the rifting sequence, following the McKenzie-type crustal model implemented in the TemisFlowTM advanced basement tool. This full thermal model was based on a calibrated map of the crustal stretching factor assumed to prevail during the rifting. The two-phase fluid flow is simulated using the Visco calculator of TemisFlowTM with a fully implicit generalized Darcy flow migration scheme. The gaseous phase consists of hydrocarbons and CO2. The simulation provides predictions of porosity, pressure, and saturation of the two phases, as well as flow velocity in all cells of the models at the end of each depositional event. Flow and compaction are largely controlled by the petrophysical properties assigned to each lithofacies. In our simulations, compaction is the sole driver of the water flow as the bottom boundary and the lateral boundaries were prescribed as no water flow boundaries. The source rock is located below the reservoir layers, in layer 2 numbered from bottom to top . It is assigned a Type I kerogen, and a uniform TOC of 4 . A 5-class compositional kinematic scheme is applied. 3.2.4. Map-based analysis The distributions of Mg-rich clay content output of DionisosFlowTM simulations Fig. 8a and the aqueous CO2 concentration that was calculated by TemisFlowTM were post-processed to populate the pre-salt reservoir layers with an indicator of the probability that clay has been converted to silica. Collard et al. 2023 , demonstrated that Mg-rich clay dissolution and quartz precipitation are directly controlled by aqueous CO2 content with no significant first order effect of pressure and tem perature. These authors further quantified the effect of aqueous CO2 concentration and Mg-rich clay content on the rate of silicification by means of a dedicated geochemical modeling workflow. We have embedded the results of geochemical modeling Collard et al., 2023 in our post-processing workflow by deriving specific in tervals of CO2 concentration and Mg-rich clay content and assigning to each interval the corresponding estimate of the transformation ratio of Mg-rich clay after 10 years Table 4 . We then used this transformation ratio and the Mg-rich clay content to calculate a net transformation ratio NTR which represents the fraction of the total rock matrix that has been converted to silica. Since many of the uncertainties discussed below were propagated throughout the workflow, we felt that the relative values of the NTR were more meaningful than the absolute values. We present the result in a qualitative manner by assigning a silicification probability indicator to each cell according to the following thresholds i Very low probability NTR 1 ii Low probability NTR in the range 1 , 6,7 iii Medium probability NTR in the range 6,7 13 and iv High probability NTR 13 . Thresholds were chosen so that the cumulative area of high silicifi cation probability across the 8 pre-salt layer maps is approximatively 10 of the cumulative area of low to high probability, and the threshold between low and medium probability was chosen so that the cumulative area of very low probability is approximatively half of the total area. 3.2.3.2. Forward simulation of dissolved salt and CO2. A prototype version of the Visco simulator was also used to simulate dissolved salt and CO2 transport and the CO2 equilibrium between the water and gas phases. Salt solubility versus temperature is calculated using the poly nomial function proposed by Harvie et al. 1984 . Thermodynamic pa rameters used to calculate CO2 solubility in brines are taken from Duan and Sun 2003 . A uniform salinity at the time of sediment deposition is assumed in all layers of the model. The depositional salinity of all layers above the salt layer is assumed to be 35 g l. In the salt layer and in the sediments deposited between 117 and 113.106 years, the depositional salinity is prescribed to be 220 g l according to the salinity data collected in the reservoir which still shows a very high salinity at pre sent. At the base of the model six bottom layers , a depositional salinity value of 10 g l is prescribed. The CO2 content in the layers at the time of deposition is set to 0 throughout the model. The CO2 source is assumed to be located at the base of the model and is constrained by a basal CO2 flux map expressed in kg m2 106 years. A realistic scenario would be that the CO2 flux at the base of the sediments is controlled by crustal thickening during the rifting. We have developed a mathematical transformation of the crustal thickening map that yields a normalized CO2 production map. It is consistent with the global hypothesis that CO2 is produced by the regional Outer-High fault and by the magmatic intrusion located beneath the center of the modeled area, where x,y represents the beta factor map used in the McKenzie-type crustal thermal modeling 2 CO2production x, y 4. Results 4.1. Forward stratigraphic modeling 4.1.1. Lower Barra Velha Formation A depositional environment with paleo-bathymetries from 20 to 50m around the paleo-highs, about 70m on the nearby flanks, and up to about 200m in the offshore basin areas was configured to enable the model the formation of the extensive lacustrine carbonates of the lower Barra Velha Formation. Sedimentation occurred in the early post-rift stage of the Santos Basin, where subsidence on the paleo highs was up to 30 m Ma and in the offshore area about 100 m Ma, reaching locally high values of 150 m Ma. Additional accommodation space was generated due to the variation of the eustatic lake level curve, which reached a local maximum at about 121 Ma, then dropped 40m at 119 Ma, before reaching a maximum again at the end of the Lower BVF deposition. Best results for thicknesses from well data and seismic horizons as well as facies distribution patterns were obtained with sediment production rate values of 50 m My for spherulite and shrub, 60 m My for Mg-rich clays and 80 m My for hemipelagic micrite Fig. 5, Table 1 . Transformation rates for spherulite and shrub into reworked sediment were fixed at 20 m My. Wave energy had to exceed 20 kW m for shrub production to x, y 3 Max x, y 3 x, y This transformation was not based on any geodynamic theory but designed to peak where the stretching factor is the highest and to fall to 0 away from these areas. 10 A.-B. Christ et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 180 2025 107455 Fig. 8. Maps calculated in the upper pre-salt layer, a Mg-rich clay content, b net transformation ratio, c salinity. Table 4 Estimated Mg-rich clay transformation ratio after 10.106 years, per range of CO2 concentration of the water and clay content of the rock matrix. Class of CO2 content ppm 0 2500 2500 8500 8500 37500 Above 37500 Class of clay content 67,5 100 45 67,5 25 45 0 25 1.5 7 25 99 1.3 8 30 100 5 15 60 100 11 50 100 100 occur. Modeling results show that the paleo-highs are dominated by shrubstone with a surrounding fringe of spherulitestone Fig. 9 . Reworked facies are present on the paleo-highs in permanently exposed areas. They also occur on the paleo highs during high lake level and in alternating sequences with micrite and Mg-rich mudstone near the paleo-highs, with a higher frequency at the beginning of the lower Barra Velha Formation. The intermediate bathymetry of the lake, between 30 and 50m near the paleo-highs is dominated by Mg-rich mudstone. The deeper offshore areas of the lake are dominated by hemipelagic micritic sediments. Mg-rich mudstone occurs predominantly near the paleo-highs in lake bathymetries between 30 and 50m Fig. 9 . They surround the flanks of the paleo-highs. Concentrations of sediment type Mg-rich clay can reach up to about 60 Fig. 10 . They are particularly high to the west of the paleo-high, but highest concentrations are found to the south of the paleo-high. The maximum distribution of Mg-rich clay is reached in the Lower Barra Velha Formation at about 119 My when a lowering of the lake level occurred. Thickness calibration around the paleo-highs where well data were available shows a mean thickness error of 13m. For the entire modeled area, the thickness error is 75m Fig. A6 . Fig. 9. Evolution of facies development and correlation with the lake level throughout the Barra Velha Formation. Mg-rich mudstones get predominantly deposited at the flanks of the paleo high, whereas the paleo highs are domi nated by shrubstones and spherulitestones. BVF Barra Velha Formation, SBU Salt Base Unconformity, IAU Intra-Alagoas Unconformity, PAU Pre Alagoas Unconformity. BVF with values around 50 80m around the paleo-highs and between 100 and 250 m My in the basin area. The best results in terms of thickness and facies distribution patterns were obtained by increasing the carbonate production rates of the sediments especially of those presented on the paleo-highs Fig. 5, Table 1 . The values were 120 m My for shrub, 100 m My for spherulite and 80 m My for Mg-rich clay. 4.1.2. Upper Barra Velha Formation Paleobathymetries at the base of the Upper BVF are almost identical to those of the Lower BVF, but the relief gradually becomes flatter cf. Fig. A3 . At the top of the Upper BVF, the relief is only up to 50m for most of the study area which looks like a shallow lake, prior to salt deposition. The subsidence has a higher range compared to the Lower 11 A.-B. Christ et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 180 2025 107455 which explains the relatively more varying lithological distribution visible on the facies log. Shrubstones, spherulitestones and reworked facies that were simulated on the paleo-high, correspond to the main facies types present on the well-log well. The reworked facies was simulated mainly below the Intra-Alagoas Unconformity, which is consistent with the log data. Besides, shrubstones appear to be more dominant than spherulitestones based on modelling, an observation that is also confirmed by the log data Figs. 4 and 11 . The simulation for well C on the paleo-flank shows an alternation of Mg-rich mudstone and micrite up to the Upper BVF, with a maximum of Mg-rich mudstone around the Intra-Alagoas Unconformity. Reworked facies are present at the base of the Lower BVF. The top of the Upper Barra Velha Formation is dominated by spherulitestones. The simulation results are consistent with the general trend visible in the lithology log of well C, which shows a transition from micrite to Mg-rich mudstone around the Intra-Alagoas Unconformity to an alternation of spherulitestones and shrubstones at the top. The lithology log shows many alternations of Mg-rich mudstone and micrite with reworked facies that could not be reproduced in the simulation. Besides, the shrubstone intervals at the top of the BVF could not be reproduced for this well. 4.1.4. Uncertainty and sensitivity analysis of FSM A total of 30 simulations were run, following the Latin hypercube design to parameterize the selected uncertain parameters of the model. The calculated mathematical response surface shows a predictivity of 0.967, which is close to 1 and therefore shows high predictivity. The average percentage of Mg-rich clay for the 30 simulations varies be tween 7.43 and 14.57 . Fig. 12 shows that four parameters have a significant contribution to the average Mg-rich clay percentage in the model contribution 10 the most influential of which is subsidence 50.1 . Carbonate production vs. water depth 19.1 , carbonate production vs. time 15.9 and lake level variation curve 11.7 have a significant influence. The rest of the parameters tested have a relatively small effect 0.5 . Fig. 10. Average Mg-rich clay content for the Lower a and the Upper Barra Velha Formation b . Cross section of the model in E-W direction showing the average Mg-rich clay content c and facies distribution d vertical exagger ation 10 . 4.2. Basin thermal modeling The lithofacies distribution of the new model has been modified from the calibrated original model see above , therefore, we first ensured that the new model remained calibrated by comparing the pressure, temperature, and hydrocarbon saturation over time of the two models. There was no significant difference in these quantities the model re mains hydrostatic, and the hydrocarbon filling history of the traps is unchanged. Production rates for hemipelagic micrite remained constant at 80 m My. Sediment transformation rates and wave energy are identical to the Lower Barra Velha Formation. The lake level curve has two minima for the Upper BVF at about 116 My and at 113.5 My, decreasing by about 40m each time. A maximum is reached at 115 My. The boundary between the Lower and Upper BVF is characterized by a Mg-rich mudstone interval, which is also visible in the well data from the flanks of the paleo-highs Fig. 11 . Modeling shows that the shrub stones and spherulitestones are more abundant during the lake level maximum, at about 115 Ma. They appear to transgress from the highs onto the flanks and finally into the basin area, especially on the east side of the paleo-high. Mg-rich clays are less abundant compared to the Lower Barra Velha Formation, but locally reach higher concentrations, especially on the eastern flanks of the paleo-high with values of up to 67 Fig. 10 . Thickness calibration around the paleo-highs where well data is available shows a mean thickness error of 47m. For the entire modeled area, the thickness error is 80m Fig. A6 . 4.2.1. Paleo-hydrodynamics The general paleo-hydrodynamics in the layers of interest is controlled by the impermeable boundaries the upper boundary con sisting of the salt layer, and the bottom and lateral surfaces - and the quasi-hydrostatic pressure at the lateral boundaries, which is obtained by imposing a high permeability on a 1-cell layer at the lateral bound aries. It follows that the general flow pattern is centripetal and parallel to the stratigraphy Fig. 8c , with the highest flow velocity in the upper layers as compaction and permeability increase upward. The normal to bedding component of the flow velocity is generally much lower, but we can observe localized vertical fluid exchange controlled by local permeability heterogeneities Fig. 13 . Fluid flow velocity is highest immediately after salt deposition with maximum velocities of about 5000 m Myrs in the upper reservoir layer and decreases thereafter. After 100 Myrs, maximum fluid velocities rarely exceed 50 m Myrs in the area of interest. With the new distribution of lithofacies given by the FSM study, the increase in permeability along the major faults and the new lateral boundary conditions, the paleo-hydrodynamics are likely to have been modified from the original model. Fig. 13 confirms the difference be tween the fluid flow velocity fields of the two models. This is further 4.1.3. Comparison of FSM results and well data Two representative wells, one located on the paleo-high well D and the other one on the paleo-flank well C , were selected to compare the simulation results with the original facies log from well data Fig. 11 . An important consideration for calibration is the difference in resolution between the simulation result and the well data. The model has a time step of 0.25 My compared to a much finer resolution of the lithology log, 12 A.-B. Christ et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 180 2025 107455 Fig. 11. Comparison between the facies logs of the hard data and the facies logs of the simulated data for representative wells on the paleo flank C and on the paleo high D . BVF Barra Velha Formation, SBU Salt Base Unconformity, IAU Intra-Alagoas Unconformity, PAU Pre -Alagoas Unconformity. 4.2.2. Salinity, CO2 concentration, and fluid evolution The salinity of the lower pre-salt layers remains constant throughout the simulation while the salinity of the upper pre-salt layers decreases in areas where mixing with low salinity water from below occurs. In these areas, the rate of salinity decrease is controlled by the velocity of the water flow. It follows that the salinity stabilizes during the 106 93,5 Myrs time interval. The upper pre-salt salinity map in Fig. 8c shows two main NE-SW trending low-salinity plumes, one crossing the northern part of the Pre-Salt field anticline, and the other one overlying the southern part of the Outer High structure. CO2 can migrate both as an advected solute and as a component of the gaseous phase in cells where the water is saturated with CO2. In our simulations, where CO2 is injected into the bottom layer at a constant rate until 113 Myrs, we observe that a gaseous phase of CO2 appears at 119 Myrs in the bottom layer and starts to migrate upward due to buoyancy and hydrodynamics. This upward migration is localized in gas chimneys feeding CO2-rich traps located in the pre-salt layer, especially along the Pre-Salt field anticline Figs. 13 and 14 . In addition, hydrodynamics generate plumes of CO2-rich water that emanate from these chimneys and spread horizontally. The upper pre-salt layer shows two areas of high aqueous CO2 concentration, along the central part of the Pre-Salt field anticline, and above the southern part of the Outer Fig. 12. Graphical representation of the parameter contribution on Mg-rich clay percentage in the model. illustrated by an upward flow in the two base layers of the new model below the anticline, whereas no significant hydrodynamic connection between the base layers and the upper reservoir layers could be observed in the original model see Fig. 13 . 13 A.-B. Christ et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 180 2025 107455 Fig. 14. CO2 concentration calculated along the reference cross-sections in the pre-salt layers map view of the cross-sections traces on Fig. 6 . The black line separates the cells with no free gas top from the cell containing free gas bottom . the basin scale. 5.1. Implications of the integrated stratigraphic and burial thermal modeling workflow The conceptual geological model as described in the literature Gomes et al., 2020 Herlinger et al., 2017 Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al., 2017 with shrubstones and spherulitestones present on the paleo-high, Mg-rich clay on the paleo flanks and micrite in the basin part was tested with the FSM approach and could be confirmed. The FSM simulation results show good calibration in terms of lithology and sequence thickness for the Lower and Upper BVF when compared with well log lithology and sequence thickness data Fig. 9, Fig. A6, Fig. 11 . Therefore, values such as sediment production, lake level curve, subsi dence, paleobathmetry can be considered calibrated for the time at deposition. The sedimentary system changes from a mud dominated system in the Lower BVF to a shallow water dominated system in the Upper BFV, which is especially recognizable in the well data from the wells on the flanks of the paleo high Fig. 4 . To achieve a match of the modeled results with the well data, carbonate production curves for the sedi ment types for the Upper BVF needed to be increased by 33 for Mgrich clay, 100 for spherulite and 140 for shrub compared to the Lower BVF. Deposited thicknesses vary for the Lower BFV between the paleo high and the flanks but are much more homogenous for the Upper BFV Fig. 4 . In the Upper BVF shrubstones and spherulitestone are also present at the flanks of the paleo high and extend further into the basin Figs. 9 and 10 . Shrub and spherulite sediment types depend on biological factors for their growth Ceraldi and Green, 2017 Gomes et al., 2020 . A potential change in lake water chemistry or a change in lake currents delivering more nutrients could have led to more favorable growth conditions during the Upper BFV. During the Lower BFV several deeper lakes might have existed around the paleo high which merged into a more continuous larger lake during the Upper BVF. A larger connected lake could favor the distribution of nutrients. Those changes could be related to underlying tectonic origins shown by the presence of unconformities. Introducing uncertainty into the model by varying the input pa rameters of the simulation showed a high predictivity of the facies Fig. 13. Flow velocity field calculated with TemisFlowTM at t 112 Myrs along the reference EW vertical cross-section of the pre-salt layers, with the lithology distributions of the original model a and the new model b . The cross-sections are colored with facies index see Fig. 7 , the black ellipse focuses on the up ward flow that brings the deep fluids to the upper layers in the new model. High structure. The basin simulation also provides insight into the filling history of the Pre-Salt field reservoir. The CO2 started to form a gas phase between 113 and 112 Myrs, during salt deposition, while hydrocarbons appear soon after between 112 and 106 Myrs Fig. A8 . Maximum saturation is reached at 106 Myrs. Thereafter, we observe a that the CO2 concentra tion decreases slightly in favor of the hydrocarbons. 5. Discussion This study investigates the potential outcomes of the interactions between Mg-rich clays host facies and the CO2-rich fluid upwelling, and the resulting silicification of lacustrine carbonate reservoir of the BVF at the basin scale. While previous studies have extensively explored the implications of the controlling diagenetic processes involved at the well scale Basso et al., 2023 Lima de Jesus et al., 2023 and at the reservoir scale Almeida Carvalho et al., 2024 , they have not addressed the predictability of silicification beyond well control at the basin scale. To fill this gap, we apply a new integrative workflow based on 3D process simulation coupled with quantitative geochemical analysis to understand the silicification probability of the BVF in space and time at 14 A.-B. Christ et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 180 2025 107455 distribution. It shows that the model is robust as there is minor variation in the average percentage of sediment type Mg-rich clay between 7.43 and 14.57 across the study area. The result of thickness calibration between the seismic horizon data and the simulation is well achieved in zones with well data around the paleo-high ranging from 13 to 47m Fig. A6 . Mismatches are localized in the Northwest simulation thickness too thin and the Southeast simulation thickness too thick far away from well data in the basin area. Getting a better calibration result in those areas was not without losing the thickness calibration in other parts of the model. Sensitivity analysis identified subsidence with a contribution of over 50 as the most influential parameter on the percentage of Mg-rich clay in the model Fig. 12 . This parameter comes from the seismic horizons, a type of data that already has a higher un certainty in the area. The BVF is covered by a 2000 2500m thick evaporite layer Chang et al., 1990 Dias, 1998 Pereira and Macedo, 1990 . Low contrast rock densities in the formation plus the coverage by thick evaporites complicate seismic interpretation and time-depth con version. While the seismic horizons did not affect the primary outcome of this study, future work on seismic interpretation and depth-migration in the study area could reduce the uncertainty. The workflow used in this study differs from most standard basin analyses by first introducing a preliminary stratigraphic forward modeling stage Fig. 2 . FSM simulates geological processes through time to reconstruct lithology distribution. Coupled with basin modeling it has been shown to reduce uncertainties in petrophysical parameter distributions by better constraining lithofacies Barabasch et al., 2019 Christ et al., 2016 Dubille et al., 2017 . The FSM approach provided 8 detailed lithology distribution maps for the pre-salt formations. In particular, the spatial distribution of Mgrich clays is an essential element for the understanding of the silicifi cation intervals in this part of the Santos Basin Pereira et al., 2023 . Coupled with the burial and thermal model the probability of silicifi cation can be predicted. Mg-rich clays occur predominantly in a ba thymetry window of 20 50m because of the associated carbonate production curve. The Mg-rich clay production is supposed to cease with increasing bathymetry, as it requires a high pH value of 9.5. At deeper bathymetries elevated methane levels and associated acidity due to organic sediment accumulation is supposed to prevent the formation of Mg-rich clays Tosca and Wright, 2014 . Therefore, the production curve was adapted to follow this trend. This production window results in a widespread Mg-rich clay accumulation in the basin but elevated values in proximity to the highs and on the paleo-flanks, which offered favorable conditions for accumulation below the wave base Fig. 10 . With the FSM approach and its validation by means of to the calibration at the well locations, average Mg-rich clay content could be calculated at the basin scale. FSM results also provided basin-scale spatial distribu tions for other lithologies present in the BVF, which constrained the porosity and permeability distributions for the burial thermal model Fig. A5 . Shrubstones and spherulitestones were assigned a higher permeability increased by a factor of 1000 than micritic and Mg-rich mudstones, resulting in a contrast in rock properties. Compared to the first-generation burial thermal model, a more differentiated flow ve locity field becomes apparent Fig. 13 . Areas of shrubstones and spherulitestones act as pathways for CO2 migration from deeper layers along faults and along stratigraphic layers forming chimney and tree-like structures Fig. 13 . The same phenomenon has been observed at the well scale Basso et al., 2023 and at the reservoir scale Almeida Carvalho et al., 2024 . This result highlights the importance of the lithology distribution as one of the key drivers of fluid migration across different observation scales. Therefore, it is important to include a detailed lithology distribution to correctly predict the silicification probability. Around the Pre-Salt field anticline, FSM predicts a lithology dominated by shrubstones and spherulitestones Figs. 9, 10 and 13 . These act as conduits for CO2 migration and CO2 can rise to the salt base, along which it begins to migrate laterally Fig. 14 . Where the FSM predicts a predominantly micritic lithology, such as north of the Pre-Salt field anticline, low per meabilities act as a seal for CO2 migration, resulting in high CO2 con centrations being trapped in the pre-salt layers Fig. 14 . The effect on general hydrodynamics is difficult to measure but is probably of sec ondary importance compared to the role of faults. Comparison of the hydrodynamics of the original model with the new model Fig. A7 shows that the combined effect of the decrease in permeability in the shale facies and the increase in permeability along faults leads to local differences in CO2 concentration due to flow modifications, but the regional trends are preserved. 5.2. Quantitative assessment of the dynamics of CO2 migration in the basin Results of this integrated basin modeling workflow not only provided insight into the probability of silicification, but also highlighted some interesting features regarding the CO2 system. Analysis of the basin simulation results shows that the CO2 can only begin to migrate from the deepest layers when the permeability is sufficient to allow the flow, i.e., in the relatively shallowest parts of the deepest layer Fig. 14 . In the deepest areas, the permeability of the rock is close to the irreducible permeability after salt deposition and is no longer compacting, trapping the dissolved and free CO2 in the porosity. As the CO2 accumulates over time, it forms a gas phase and the overpressure begins to rise, but not enough to exceed the capillary pressure of the source rock sitting above the bottom layer Fig. A8 . Upward migration of CO2 occurs in areas where the basement is shallower, making the lowest layers more permeable, particularly around the Pre-Salt field anticline and the western compartment of the Outer High lineament where faults were modeled by 10 times more permeable facies Fig. 14 . These areas of relatively higher permeability provide flow paths for the upward migration of gaseous CO2 by buoy ancy and hydrodynamics generated by the low-salinity and CO2-rich fluids expelled from the deepest layers by compaction Fig. 14 . As the deepest fluids flow into the upper pre-salt layers, they are locally mixed with the fluids in place, thus reducing local salinity, increasing CO2 solubility and CO2 concentration, and ultimately feeding the gaseous phase with CO2. Therefore, the uncertainty in predicting the CO2 con centration in the subsalt layer is primarily due to the uncertainty in the sediment thickness which controls the distribution of permeability and rock compactability in the deepest layers, and to a lesser extent to the position and permeability of major faults which provide localized flow paths connecting the basement to the upper pre-salt layer. The sensi tivity of the distribution of CO2 concentration to the geological scenario is illustrated in Fig. A7, where a comparison between the two maps of CO2 concentration predicted with the original with no fault and a basic lithological distribution - and the updated model at 112 Myrs in the presalt layer. The two maps show the same trends with local differences, notably sharper concentration peaks in the new model such as the concentration peak located at the northeast end of the Pre-Salt field anticline. The CO2 production flux map may affect the relative con centration peak at the top of the deepwater inflows but not their loca tion. We expect it to play a secondary role in the overall trends of the silicification probability maps obtained in this study. This analysis shows that the basin simulation contributes to the workflow mainly by predicting a distribution of the CO2 concentration that is quite robust, since it is controlled to the first order by the sediment thickness which shows little uncertainty. This conclusion is very specific to the geochemical system considered here where pressure and temperature play only a secondary role. The basin simulation also provided insight into the temporal evolu tion of the composition of the non-water phase - including hydrocarbons and CO2 - trapped in the Pre-Salt field reservoir. CO2 appeared first, but very shortly before hydrocarbons Fig. A9 . This supports the assump tion that the diagenetic episode was very short in time, if the arrival of hydrocarbons stopped the process, or that diagenesis continued after the 15 A.-B. Christ et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 180 2025 107455 arrival of hydrocarbons, possibly with slower kinetics. Finally, this analysis also showed a slight decrease in the amount of CO2 trapped in the reservoir over time, which can be interpreted as a continuous supply of fresh hydrocarbons while the supply of CO2 from the deepest layers has decreased due to reduced compaction and the interruption of CO2 production. Our study focusses on an internal source of silica associated to a first phase of silicification and CO2 rich fluid upwelling along deep-rooted faults. However, there are other possible scenarios regarding silicifica tion. For example, hydrothermal activity can also be a source of silica and the interplay of burial diagenesis and hydrothermal fluids can lead to the precipitation and dissolution of minerals impacting the reservoir quality in the region De Ros, 2021 . Dissolution of Mg-rich clays and silicification could also come from maturation of organic matter, which can generate CO2 and organic acids, which can in turn also dissolve Mg-rich clays. Future studies could investigate alternative scenarios regarding the CO2 origin and silica source to calculate silicification probability with our described workflow. 5.3. Consequences of the interactions of CO2-fluids and the carbonate host rocks silicification Collard et al. 2023 investigated the mechanisms driving the silici fication of continental carbonates using geochemical batch modelling constrained by a large set of samples from the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin Brazil . They evaluated the contribution of different silica sources, including the contribution of Mg-rich clay alteration to silici fication, and the physicochemical conditions that trigger silicification. Their models showed that pH is the first-order parameter controlling the stability of Mg-rich clay. pH can be influenced by several processes, including local CO2 inputs in sedimentary basins. They also showed that the water-to-rock ratio and secondary mineral formation may constrain the dissolution of Mg-rich clay and the precipitation of secondary phases such as quartz, dolomite and magnesite by renewing the source of proton more effectively and acting as a sink for Si and Mg which affects the saturation state of the solution. The dissolution of carbonates and their cementation or replacement by silica are supposed to be a driving factor on the permeability and porosity. High silicification probability can be an indicator for reservoir quality. For this reason, the understanding of the silicification processes and the modeling of the spatial distribution of silicification probability are of great importance in the characterization of pre-salt carbonates. The integrated process-based modeling workflow presented above, provided therefore the two essential input data types for the assessment of silicification probability on the Outer High of the Santos Basin Fig. 2 . FSM simulated the spatial heterogeneity of sedimentary facies, notably the Mg-rich clays. Basin modeling simulated the temporal evo lution and spatial distribution of controlling factors for silicification, notably pressure, temperature, salinity, and CO2 concentration. Combining these with the results of process-based geochemical modeling Table 4 Collard et al., 2023 allowed the computation of Mg-rich clay transformation probability across the study area. Silicification probability maps were calculated for the 8 pre-salt layers. Silicification probability appears to be very low in most parts of the Outer High Fig. 15 . It is higher close to the Pre-Salt field anti cline and in the northeast and southeast parts of the Outer High, where the CO2 concentration and Mg-rich clay content reached sufficient levels to dissolve Mg-rich clay and precipitate quartz in the host-rocks. In more details, medium to high silicification probability is observed in a few small spots situated to the east and at the Pre-Salt field anticline where it peaks at the northern end of the anticline crest Fig. 15 . These areas coincide with those showing relatively high Mg-rich clay contents Figs. 8a and 7 , as well as zones of high CO2 concentrations Fig. A7 . Consequently, the produced silicification maps are coherent with the input data and the process-based calculations. They point out to those areas and depth intervals where the continental carbonate rocks have Fig. 15. Silicification probability map calculated for the Upper Barra Velha Formation pre-salt layer. been silicified and affected by inherent dissolution of remaining car bonates , resulting in highly porous and permeable pre-salt reservoirs that are produced in the various fields offshore Brazil. Quantitative silicification data from the other reservoirs in the study area were not provided, so the predicted silicification probability maps cannot be compared with in-situ observations. An interesting perspective of this study would be a regional analysis of silicification to evaluate the validity of our prediction. 6. Conclusions To better understand and predict reservoir quality in the Barra Velha Formation at the larger, basin-scale, we focused our work on the spatial and temporal prediction of the silicification probability due to the interaction between CO2-rich fluids and Mg-rich clays. For this purpose, we have developed an innovative workflow that integrates forward stratigraphic modeling FSM , basin thermal modeling and quantitative geochemical modeling. FSM simulated with a process-based modeling approach the Mg-rich clay distribution and associated uncertainties at the time of deposition of the Barra Velha Formation. Basin modeling simulated the factors that control the diagenetic reactions responsible for silicification over time, namely the CO2 flow, salinity, thermody namic conditions, and fluid composition. Geochemical modeling allowed calculation of the Mg-rich clay transformation ratio to silica. The combination of Mg-rich clay distribution, diagenetic control factors, and chemical kinetics allowed the calculation of silicification probabil ity maps. This study explored the scenario of an internal silica source and transformation of Mg-rich clays by CO2-rich waters, which are expelled from the deepest parts of the Santos Basin via a deep-rooted fault system. The highest probability of silicification was observed at the northeastern end of the Pre-Salt field anticline. Other high silicification probabilities were identified above the Outer-High lineament and to a lesser extent in the northeast of the study area. With respect to reservoir quality, it is essential to understand not 16 Marine and Petroleum Geology 180 2025 107455 A.-B. Christ et al. only the silicification process, but also the dissolution of the matrix and replacement with dolomite, at both the well and basin scales. An inte grated process-based modeling workflow, as demonstrated in this study, coupled with geochemical modeling that also focuses on dissolution and dolomitization could help in understanding reservoir quality. Aslanian, D., Moulin, M., Olivet, J., Unternehr, P., Matias, L., Bache, F., Rabineau, M., Nouze , H., Klingelheofer, F., Contrucci, I., Labails, C., 2009. Brazilian and African passive margins of the Central segment of the South Atlantic Ocean kinematic constraints. Tectonophysics 468, 98 112. Bassant, P., Harris, M., 2008. Analyzing reservoir architecture of isolated carbonate platforms. AAPG. Search and Discovery. Article 40295. Basso, M., Belila, A.M.P., Chinelatto, G.F., Souza, J.P.P., Vidal, A.C., 2020. Sedimentology and petrophysical analysis of pre-salt lacustrine carbonate reservoir from the Santos Basin, southeast Brazil. Int. J. Earth Sci. 110, 2573 2595. Basso, M., Chinelatto, G.F., Belila, A.M.P., Mendes, L.C., Souza, J.P.P., Stefanelli, D., Vidal, A.C., Bueno, J.F., 2023. Characterization of silicification and dissolution zones by integrating borehole image logs and core samples a case study of a well from the Brazilian pre-salt. Pet. Geosci. 29 3 . https doi.org 10.1144 petgeo2022-044. Beasley, C.J., Fiduk, J.C., Bize, E., Boyd, A., Frydman, M., Zerilli, A., Dribus, J.R., Moreira, J.L.P., Capeleiro Pinto, A.C., 2010. Brazil s presalt play. Oilfeld Review 22 3 , 28 37. Beltrao, R.L.C., Sombra, C.L., Lage, A.C.V., Netto, J.R.F., Henriques, C.C.D., 2009. SS pre-salt Santos basin-challenges and new technologies for the development of the pre-salt cluster, Santos basin, Brazil. In Offshore Technology Conference. OTC. OTC19880 . Bosscher, H., Schlager, W., 1993. Accumulation rates of carbonate platforms. J. Geol. 101 3 , 345 355. Bruneau, B., Chauveau, B., Baudin, F., Moretti, I., 2017. 3D stratigraphic forward numerical modelling approach for prediction of organic-rich deposits and their heterogeneities. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 82, 1 20. Bruneau, B., Villie , M., Ducros, M., Chauveau, B., Baudin, F., Moretti, I., 2018. 3D numerical modelling and sensitivity analysis of the processes controlling organic matter distribution and Heterogeneity A case study from the Toarcian of the Paris Basin. Geosciences 8 11 , 405. https doi.org 10.3390 geosciences8110405. Burgess, P.M., Lammers, H., van Oosterhout, C., Granjeon, D., 2006. Multivariate sequence stratigraphy. Tackling complexity and uncertainty with stratigraphic forward modeling, multiple scenarios, and conditional frequency maps. AAPG Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull. 90 12 , 1883 1901. https doi.org 10.1306 06260605081. Busson, J., Joseph, P., Mulder, T., Teles, V., Borgomano, J., Granjeon, D., 2019. Highresolution stratigraphic forward modeling of a Quaternary carbonate margin. Controls and dynamic of the progradation. Sediment. Geol. 379, 77 96. https doi. org 10.1016 j.sedgeo.2018.11.004. Bustillo, M.A., 2010. Chapter 3 silicification of Continental carbonates. In AlonsoZarza, A.M., Tanner, L.H. Eds. , Developments in Sedimentology. Elsevier, pp. 153 178. Carminatti, M., Wolff, B., Gamboa, L., 2008. New exploratory frontiers in Brazil. 19th World Petroleum Congress. Madrid. Catuneanu, O., Abreu, V., Bhattacharya, J.P., Blum, M.D., Dalrymple, R.W., Eriksson, P. G., Fielding, C.R., Fisher, W.L., Galloway, W.E., Gibling, M.R., Giles, K.A., Holbrook, J.M., Jordan, R., Kendall, C.G.StC., Macurda, B., Martinsen, O.J., Miall, A. D., Neal, J.E., Nummedal, D., Pomar, L., Posamentier, H.W., Pratt, B.R., Sarg, J.F., Shanley, K.W., Steel, R.J., Strasser, A., Tucker, M.E., Winker, C., 2009. Towards the standardization of sequence stratigraphy. Earth Sci. Rev. 92. Ceraldi, T.S., Green, D., 2017. Evolution of the South Atlantic lacustrine deposits in response to Early Cretaceous rifting, subsidence and lake hydrology. Petroleum Geoscience of the West Africa Margin. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 77 98. Chang, H.K., Kowsmann, R.O., Figueiredo, A.M.F., Bender, A.A., 1992. Tectonics and stratigraphy of the East Brazil Rift system an overview. Tectonophysics 213, 97 138. Chang, H.K., Kowsmann, R.O., Figueiredo, A.M.F., Raja Gabaglia, G.P., Milani, E.J., 1990. Novos Conceitos Sobre O Desenvolvimento das Bacias Marginais do Leste Brasileiro, Origem e Evoluc a o de Bacias Sedimentares. PETROBRAS, Rio de Janeiro, pp. 269 289. Christ, A., Schenk, O., Salomonsen, P., 2016. Using stratigraphic forward modeling to model the brookian sequence of the alaska north slope. In Geostatistical and Geospatial Approaches for the Characterization of Natural Resources in the Environment Challenges, Processes and Strategies. Springer International Publishing, pp. 623 626. Claps, M., Zempolich, W.G., Casaglia, F., Ronchi, P., 2009. Sedimentology and Stratigraphy of the Kashagan Buildup, Carboniferous, Pricaspian Basin, Kazakhstan AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition. Search and Discovery, Denver, Colorado. Denver, Colorado, USA, pp. Article 90090. Collard, N., Bemer, E., Nader, F.H., Renard, S., Cacas, M.-C., Christ, A.-B., Borges Gomes, J.P., Gomes de Souza JR, O., Wense Ramnani, C., 2023. Understanding the mechanisms behind the silification of continental carbonate rocks insights from geochemical modelling. 17th Workshop of the International Lithosphere Program ILP-Task Force VI on Sedimentary Basins. Abu Dhabi. Csato, I., Catuneanu, O., Granjeon, D., 2014. Millennial-Scale sequence stratigraphy. Numerical simulation with dionisos. J. Sediment. Res. 84 5 , 394 406. https doi. org 10.2110 jsr.2014.36. de Freitas, V.A., dos Santos Vital, J.C., Rodrigues, B.R., Rodrigues, R., 2022. Source rock potential, main depocenters, and CO2 occurrence in the pre-salt section of Santos Basin, southeast Brazil. J. S. Am. Earth Sci. 115, 103760. https doi.org 10.1016 j. jsames.2022.103760. Deocampo, D.M., 2005. Evaporative evolution of surface waters and the role of aqueous CO2 in magnesium silicate precipitation lake Eyasi and Ngorongoro Crater, northern Tanzania. S. Afr. J. Geol. 108, 493 504. https doi.org 10.2113 108.4.493. CRediT authorship contribution statement Alina-Berenice Christ Writing review editing, Writing orig inal draft, Validation, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Marie-Christine Cacas-Stentz Writing review editing, Writing original draft, Validation, Software, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Concep tualization. Nathalie Collard Writing original draft, Validation, Su pervision, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis. Fadi Henri Nader Writing review editing, Writing original draft, Validation, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology, Investi gation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Elisabeth Bemer Supervi sion, Project administration. Rodrigo Branda o Bunevich Validation, Supervision, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis. Joa o Paulo Borges Gomes Validation, Supervision, Investigation, Formal analysis. Olinto Gomes de Souza Validation, Supervision, Methodology, Investigation. Maria Anna Abreu de Almeida dos Reis Validation, Supervision, Methodology. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Acknowledgements The results and interpretations of this paper were part of a collabo ration between IFP Energies nouvelles and Petrobras. The authors greatly acknowledge Petrobras for the data release and permission to publish this research. We also thank Dr. Didier Granjeon for reviewing the manuscript. We extend our appreciation to the journal s reviewers and editors. Appendix A. Supplementary data Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https doi. org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2025.107455. Data availability The data that has been used is confidential. References Almeida Carvalho, A.M., Collard, N., Hamon, Y., Meiller, C., 2024. Assessing the role of local versus regional fluid circulation in the pre-salt sag section of Santos Basin Brazil insights from reactive transport modeling. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 162, 106711. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2024.106711. Almeida Carvalho, A.M., Hamon, Y., De Souza, O.G.J., Goulart Carramal, N., Collard, N., 2022. Facies and diagenesis distribution in an Aptian pre-salt carbonate reservoir of the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil a comprehensive quantitative approach. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 141, 105708. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2022.105708. Andres, M., Bassant, P., Harris, M., 2008. Conditioned forward stratigraphic modeling in large carbonate fields a Dionisos model of Karachaganak. AAPG. Search and Discovery. Article 40352. Arienti, L.M., Souza, R.S., Viana, S., Cuglieri, M.A., Silva, R.P., Tonietto, S., de Paula, L., Gil, J.A., 2018. Facies Association, Depositional Systems, and Paleophysiografic Models of the Barra Velha Formation, Pre-salt sequence Santos Basin. Brazil, AAPG ACE 2018. Artaga o, V.M., 2018. Ana lise estratigra fica de alta resoluc a o aplicada aos depo sitos da Formac a o Barra Velha. Bacia de Santos Identificac a o, Correlac a o e Mecanismos de Controle de Ciclos Sedimentares. Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, p. 174. 17 A.-B. Christ et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 180 2025 107455 De Ros, L.F., 2021. Syngenetic, diagenetic and hydrothermal processes in the pre-salt sag section of Santos and Campos Basins. Second EAGE Conference on Pre-Salt Reservoir. https doi.org 10.3997 2214-4609.202183007. Dias, J.L., 1998. Ana lise Sedimentolo gica e Estratigra fica do Andar Aptiano em Parte da Margem Leste Do Brasil e no Plato Das Malvinas Considerac o es Sobre as Primeiras Incurso es e Ingresso es Marinhas do Oceano Atla ntico Sul Meridional. Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. Dias, J.L., 2005. Tectonica, estratigrafia e sedimentac ao no Andar Aptiano da margem leste brasileira. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 13, 7 25. Duan, Z., Sun, R., 2003. An improved model calculating CO2 solubility in pure water and aqueous NaCl solutions from 273 to 533 K and from 0 to 2000 bar. Chem. Geol. 193 3 , 257 271. Dubille, M., Barres, E., Jermannaud, P., Piriou, S., Belenkaya, I., Pasynkov, A., Tikhomirov, E., Petrichenko, Y., 2017. Integration of Forward Stratigraphic and Petroleum System Modelling in Northeastern West Siberia-New Concepts. European Association of Geoscientists Engineers. Farias, F.A., Szatmari, P., Bahniuk, A., Franc a, A.B., 2019. Evaporitic carbonates in the pre salt of Santos Basin genesis and tectonic implications. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 105, 251 272. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2019.04.020. Folk, R.L., Chafetz, H.S., Tiezzi, P.A., 1985. Bizarre forms of depositional and diagenetic calcite in hot spring travertines, central Italy. In Schneidermann, N., Harris, P.M. Eds. , Carbonate Cements. Soc. Econ. Paleontol. Mineral. Spec. Publ., pp. 349 369 Gervais, V., Ducros, M., Granjeon, D., 2018. Probability maps of reservoir presence and sensitivity analysis in stratigraphic forward modelling. AAPG Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull. 102, 613 628. Gilbert, R., 1999. Calculated wave base in relation to the observed patterns of sediment deposition in Northeastern Lake Ontario. J. Great Lake. Res. 25, 883e891. https doi.org 10.1016 S0380-1330 99 70785-9. Gomes, J.P., Bunevich, R.B., Tedeschi, L.R., Tucker, M.E., Whitaker, F.F., 2020. Facies classification and patterns of lacustrine carbonate deposition of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazilian pre-salt. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 113. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2019.104176. Granjeon, D., 1996. Mode lisation Stratigraphique De terministe Conception et Applications d un Mode le Diffusif 3D Multilithologique, vol. 1. University of Rennes. Granjeon, D., Joseph, P., 1999. Concepts and applications of a 3-D multiple lithology, diffusive model in stratigraphic modeling. Numerical Experiments in Stratigraphy. Recent Advances in Stratigraphic and Sedimentologic Computer Simulations 62, 197 210. Granjeon, D., 2019. Use of high-performance stratigraphic forward modelling to improve siliciclastic and carbonate reservoir depositional architecture description. J. Jpn. Assoc. Pet. Technol. 84 1 , 59 70. Harvie, C.E., M ller, N., Weare, J.H., 1984. The prediction of mineral solubilities in natural waters the Na-K-Mg-Ca-H-Cl-SO4-OH-HCO3-CO3-CO2-H2O system to high ionic strengths at 25 C. Geochem. Cosmochim. Acta 48 4 , 723 751. Hawie, N., Barrois, A., Marfisi, E., Murat, B., Hall, J., El-Wazir, Z., Al-Madani, N., Gary, A., 2015. Forward stratigraphic modelling, deterministic approach to improve Carbonate heterogeneity prediction Lower Cretaceous, Abu Dhabi. Abu Dhabi International Petroleum Exhibition and Conference. Abu Dhabi, UAE. Herlinger, R.J., Zambonato, E.E., De Ros, L.F., 2017. Influence of diagenesis on the quality on the quality of lower Cretaceous pre-salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs from northern Campos Basin, offshore Brasil. J. Sediment. Res. 87 12 , 1285 1313. https doi.org 10.2110 jsr.2017.70. Jia, H., Kang, H., Li, M., Cheng, T., Hou, B., 2020. Conditions of sub-salt CO2 accumulation in the Santos Basin and implications for hydrocarbon formation. Journal of Southwest Petroleum University 42 4 , 66 72. https doi.org 10.11885 j.issn.1674-5086.2018.12.04.01. Jones, C.M., Chaves, H.A., 2011. Assessment of yet-to-find oil in the Brazilian pre-salt region. In SPE Brasil Offshore. SPE-143911 . SPE. Karner, G., Driscoll, N., 1999. Tectonic and stratigraphic development of the West African and eastern Brazilian margins insights from quantitative basin modelling. In Cameron, N., Bate, R., Clure, V. Eds. , The Oil and Gas Habitats of the South Atlantic. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 11 40. Kinsey, D.W., 1985. Metabolism, calcification and production i systems level studies. Proc. Fiftnh Inter. Coral Reef Congr. 4, 503 542. Kolodka, C., Vennin, E., Bourillot, R., Granjeon, D., Desaubliaux, G., 2016. Stratigraphic modelling of platform architecture and carbonate production a Messinian case study Sorbas Basin, SE Spain . Basin Res. 28, 658 684. https doi.org 10.1111 bre.12125. Liechoscki de Paula Faria, D., Reis, A.T., Souza Junior, O.S., 2017. Three-dimensional stratigraphic-sedimentological forward modelling of an Aptian carbonate reservoir deposited during the sag stage in the Santos basin, Brazil. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 88, 676 695. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2017.09.013. Lima, B.E., De Ros, L.F., 2019. Deposition, diagenetic and hydrothermal processes in the Aptian Pre-Salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs of the northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Sediment. Geol. 383, 55 81. https doi.org 10.1016 j. sedgeo.2019.01.006. Lima, B.E., Ribeiro Tedeschi, L., Silva Pestilho, A.L., Ventura Santos, R., Cabral Vazquez, J., Poley Guzzo, J.V., De Ros, L.F., 2020. Deep-burial hydrothermal alteration of the pre-salt carbonate reservoirs from northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil evidence from petrography, fluid inclusions, Sr, C and O isotopes. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 113, 104143. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2019.104143. Lima de Jesus, I., Romeiro Abrantes, F.J., Ariza Ferreira, D.J., Moreira Lupinacci, W., 2023. Carbonate reservoir quality and permoporosity obliteration due to silicification processes in the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Southeastern Brazil. Brazilian Journal of Geology 53 2 , e20220086. https doi.org 10.1590 2317-4889202320220086. Mack, G.H., 1978. Tectonic control of sedimentation. In Middleton, G.V., Church, M.J., Coniglio, M., Hardie, L.A., Longstaffe, F.J. Eds. , Encyclopedia of Sediments and Sedimentary Rocks. Encyclopedia of Earth Sciences Series. Springer, Dordrecht. Madrucci, V., Arau jo, C.C., Anjos, C.W.D., Spadini, A.R., 2019. Depositional paleoenvironment of authigenic magnesium clays in pre-salt of Santos Basin brazil. 16th International Meeting of Carbonate Sedimentologists, Bathurst Meeting, Mallorca 152. Mann, J., Rigg, J.W.D., 2012. New geological insights into the Santos Basin. GeoExpro 9 1 , 36 40. Marty, B., Jambon, A., 1987. C3He in volatile fluxes from the solid Earth implications for carbon geodynamics. Earth Planet Sci. Lett. 83 1 4 , 16 26. Mckenzie, D., 1978. Some remarks on the development of sedimentary basins. Earth Planet Sci. Lett. 40, 25 32. Melo-Garcia, S.F., Letouzey, J., Rudkiewicz, J.L., Danderfer Filho, A., Lamotte, D.F., 2012. Structural modeling based on sequential restoration of gravitational salt deformation in the Santos Basin Brazil . Mar. Petrol. Geol. 35, 337 353. https doi. org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2012.02.009. Mercedes-Marti n, R., Brasier, A.T., Rogerson, M.R., Reijmer, J.J.G., Vonhof, H.B., Pedley, H.M., 2017. A depositional model for spherulitic carbonates associated with alkaline, volcanic lakes. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 86, 168 191. https doi.org 10.1016 j. marpetgeo.2017.05.032. Mercedes-Marti n, R., Rogerson, M.R., Brasier, A.T., Vonhof, H.B., Prior, T.J., Fellows, S. M., Reijmer, J.J.G., Billing, I., Pedley, H.M., 2016. Growing spherulitic calcite grains in saline, hyperalkaline lakes experimental evaluation of the effects of Mgclays and organic acids. Sediment. Geol. 335, 93 102. https doi.org 10.1016 j. sedgeo.2016.02.008. Miall, A.D., 2000. Tectonism and sedimentation principles and models. Principles of Sedimentary Basin Analysis 381 416. Mizusaki, A.M.P., Thomaz Filho, A., Valen, C.A.J., 1988. Volcano-sedimentary sequence of Neocomian age in Campos Basin Brazil . Rev. Bras. Geociencias 18, 247 251. Mohriak, W., Nemcok, M., Enciso, G., 2008. South Atlantic divergent margin evolution rift-border uplift and salt tectonics in the basins of SE Brazil. In Pankhurst, R.J., Trouw, R.A.J., Brito Neves, B.B., De Wit, M.J. Eds. , West Gondwana PreCenozoic Correlations Across the South Atlantic Region. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 365 398. Moreira, J.L.P., Madeira, C.V., Gil, J.A., Machado, M.A.P., 2007. andP Explorac a o, Interpretac a o e Avaliac a o das Bacias da Costa Sul, Brazil. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 15 2 , 531 549. Muniz, M.C., Bosence, D.W.J., 2015. Pre-Salt microbialites from the Campos Basin offshore Brazil image log facies, facies model and cyclicity in lacustrine carbonates. In Bosence, D.W.J., et al. Eds. , Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 221 242. Nader, F.H., 2017. Multi-scale quantitative diagenesis and impacts on heterogeneity of carbonate reservoir rocks. Advances in Oil and Gas Exploration and Production 1 146. Nichols, G., 2009. Sedimentology and Stratigraphy. John Wiley Sons. Pereira, M.J., Macedo, J.M., 1990. A Bacia de Santos perspectivas de uma nova provi ncia petroli fera na plataforma continental sudeste brasileira. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 4 1 , 3 11. Pereira, T.P., Terra, S., Renato da Silva, D., Pires, G.L.C., Ribeiro, A., 2023. Distribution of silicification intervals throughout the Barra Velha and Itapema formations host rock controls and chronology of silica precipitation Pre-Salt, Santos Basin, Brazil . J. S. Am. Earth Sci. 128, 104446. https doi.org 10.1016 j.jsames.2023.104446. Petersohn, E., 2019. Pre-Salt super play leading Brazil into the world s top 5 oil suppliers. In AAPG Latin America and Caribbean Region Geoscience Technology Workshop, 30625, 101306. Pietzsch, R., Oliveira, D.M., Tedeschi, L.R., Queiroz Neto, J.V., Figueiredo, M.F., Vazquez, J.C., Souza, R.S., 2018. Palaeohydrology of the Lower Cretaceous pre-salt lacustrine system, from rift to post-rift phase, Santos Basin, Brazil. Palaeogeogr Palaeocl 507, 60 80. https doi.org 10.1016 j.palaeo.2018.06.043. Pietzsch, R., Tedeschi, L.R., Oliveira, D.M., dos, Anjos, Wense Dias, Camila, Vazquez, J. C., Figueiredo, M.F., 2020. Environmental conditions of deposition of the Lower Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin Brazil , based on stable carbon and oxygen isotopes a continental record of pCO2 during the onset of the Oceanic Anoxic Event 1a OAE 1a interval Chem. Geol. 535, 119457. https doi.org 10.1016 j.chemgeo.2019.119457. Pinto, V.H.G., Manatschal, G., Karpoff, A.M., Ulrich, M., Viana, A.R., 2017. Seawater storage and element transfer associated with mantle serpentinisation in magma-poor rifted margins a quantitative approach. Earth Planet Sci. Lett. 459, 227 237. https doi.org 10.1016 j.epsl.2016.11.023. Quirk, D.G., Hertle, M., Jeppesen, J.W., Raven, M., Mohriak, W.U., Kann, D., Norgaard, M., Howe, M.J., Hsu, D., Cofey, B., Mendes, M.P., 2013. Rifting, subsidence and continental break-up above a mantle plume in the central South Atlantic. In Mohriak, W.U., et al. Eds. , Conjugate Divergent Margins. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, p. 369, 2013. Rabineau, M., Berne , S., Aslanian, D., Olivet, J.L., Joseph, P., Guillocheau, F., 2005. Sedimentary sequences in the Gulf of Lion. A record of 100,000 years climatic cycles. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 22 6 7 , 775 804. https doi.org 10.1016 j. marpetgeo.2005.03.010. Rezende, M.F., Pope, M.C., 2015. Importance of depositional texture in pore characterization of subsalt microbialite carbonates. Offshore Brazil. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 193 207. Saller, A., Rushton, S., Buambua, L., Inman, K., Mcneil, R., Dickson, J.A.D., 2016. PreSalt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola. 18 A.-B. Christ et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 180 2025 107455 AAPG Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull. 100, 1135 1164. https doi.org 10.1306 02111615216. Sartorato, A.C.L., 2018. Caracterizac a o Faciolo gica, Estratigra fica e Diagene tica dos Reservato rios Carbona ticos da Formac a o Barra Velha, Bacia de Santos. Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, p. 255. Szatmari, P., Milani, E.J., 2016. Tectonic control of the oil-rich large igneous-carbonatesalt province of the South Atlantic rift. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 77, 567 596. https doi. org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2016.06.004. Sartorato, A.C.L., Tonietto, S.N., Pereira, E., 2020. Silicification and dissolution features in the brazilian Pre-salt Barra Velha formation impacts in the reservoir quality and insights for 3D geological modeling. Rio Oil Gas Expo and Conference, pp. 1 3. Schneider, F., Potdevin, J.L., Wolf, S., Faille, I., 1996. Mechanical and chemical compaction model for sedimentary basin simulators. Tectonophysics 263 1 4 , 307 317. Schneider, F., Wolf, S., Faille, I., Pot, D., 2000. A 3D basin model for hydrocarbon potential evaluation application to Congo offshore. Oil Gas Sci. Technol. 55 1 , 3 13. Seard, C., 2010. Architecture and Growth Patterns of Coral Reefs from Tahiti French Polynesia During the Last Deglacial sea-level Rise. Aix-Marseille, France. Seard, C., Camoin, G., Rouchy, J.M., Virgone, A., 2013. Composition, structure and evolution of a lacustrine carbonate margin dominated by microbialites case study from the Green River formation Eocene Wyoming, USA . Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 381, 128 144. Souza, R.S., Arienti, L.M., Viana, S.M., Falcao, L.C., Cuglieri, M.A., Silva, R.P., Leite, C.O., Oliveira, V.C., Oliveira, D.M., Anjos, C., Amora, R., Carmo, I.D., Coelho, C.E., 2018. Petrology of the hydrothermal and evaporitic continental Cretaceous Aptian presalt carbonates and associated rocks, South Atlantic Santos basin, offshore Brazil. In Article, 90323. AAPG ACE Annual Convention Exhibition, Salt Lake City, USA. Tanaka, A.P., Faria, D.L.P., Gomes, J.P.B., Souza, Jr.O.G., 2018. Geological characterization and modeling of an Aptian carbonate reservoir in the Santos basin, Brazil. AAPG 2018 AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition. Salt Lake City, Utah. Teboul, P.-A., Kluska, J.-M., Marty, N.C., Debure, M., Durlet, C., Virgone, A., Gaucher, E. C., 2017. Volcanic rock alterations of the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola - Insights from an integrated petrological, geochemical and numerical approach. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 80, 394 411. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2016.12.020. Teboul, P.-A., Durlet, C., Girard, J.-P., Dubois, L., San Miguel, G., Virgone, A., Gaucher, E.C., Camoin, G., 2019. Diversity and origin of quartz cements in continental carbonates example from the Lower Cretaceous rift deposits of the South Atlantic margin. Appl. Geochem. 100, 22 41. https doi.org 10.1016 j. apgeochem.2018.10.019. Terra, G.J.S., Spadini, A.R., Franc a, A.B., Sombra, C.L., Zambonato, E.E., Juschaks, L.C. S., Arienti, L.M., Erthal, M.M., Blauth, M., Franco, M.P., Matsuda, N.S., Carramal da Silva, N.G., Moretti Junior, P.A., D Avila, R.S.F., Souza, R.S., Tonietto, S.N., Anjos, S. M.C., Campinho, V.S., Winter, W.R., 2010. Classifcac a o de rochas carbona ticas aplica vel a s bacias sedimentares brasileiras. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 18 1 , 9 29. Torgersen, T., 1993. Defining the role of magmatism in extensional tectonics helium 3 fluxes in extensional basins. J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 98 B9 , 16257 16269. Torsvik, T.H., Rousse, S., Labails, C., Smethurst, M.A., 2009. A new scheme for the opening of the South Atlantic Ocean and the dissection of an Aptian salt basin. Geophys. J. Int. 177, 1315 1333. Tosca, N.J., Wright, V.P., 2014. The Formation and Diagenesis of Mg-clay Minerals in Lacustrine Carbonate Reservoirs. AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition, Houston, Texas. USA. Tosca, N.J., 2014. Geochemical pathways to Mg-clay formation. In Magnesian Clays Characterization, Origin and Applications AIPEA Special Publication, pp. 1 52. AIPEA. Tosca, N.J., Wright, V.P., 2015. Diagenetic Pathways Linked to Labile Mg-clays in Lacustrine Carbonate Reservoirs a Model for the Origin of Secondary Porosity in the Cretaceous Pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, Offshore Brazil, vol. 435. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 33 46. https doi.org 10.1144 SP435.1. Turner, S., Regelous, M., Kelley, S., Hawkesworth, C., Mantovani, M., 1994. Magmatism and continental break-up in the South Atlantic high precision 40Ar-39Ar geochronology. Earth Planet Sci. Lett. 121, 333 348. Vail, P.R., Mitchum Jr, R.M., Thompson, S., 1977. Seismic stratigraphy and global changes of sea level part 3. Relative changes of sea level from Coastal Onlap section 2. Application of Seismic Reflection Configuration to Stratigrapic Interpretation. Vieira, A.O., 2021. Silicificac a o sin-e po s-deposicional em um reservato rio carbona tico do pre -sal um estudo de caso na Bacia de Santos SE do Brasil . MS. Sa o LeopoldoRS. Brazil. Vieira de Luca, P.H., Matias, H., Carballo, J., Algibez Alonso, J.L., Tritlla, J., 2017. Breaking barriers and paradigms in presalt exploratin pa o de Ac u car Discovery Offshore Brazil . In Merrill, R.K., Sternbach, C.A. Eds. , Giant Fields of the Decade 2000 2010. AAPG Memoir. White, N., Mckenzie, D., 1988. Formation of the steer s head geometry of sedimentary basins by differential stretching of the crust and mantle. Geology 16, 250 253. Williams, H.D., Burgess, P., Wright, V.P., Della Porta, G., Granjeon, D., 2011. Understanding carbonate platform types multiple controls and a continuum of geometries. J. Sediment. Res. 81, 18 37. Winter, W.R., Jahnert, R.J., Franc a, A.B., 2007. Bacia de Campos. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 15, 511 529. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2015. An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates. In Bosence, D.W.J., et al. Eds. , Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. Geological Society, London, Special Publications. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2017. Critically Evaluating the Current Depositional Models for the Pre-salt Barra Velha Formation. Offshore Brazil. AAPG Search and Discovery. Article 51439. 19

[END_OF_PAPER]

Sedimentology 2022 69, 47 73 doi 10.1111 sed.12835 The mantle, CO2 and the giant Aptian chemogenic lacustrine carbonate factory of the South Atlantic Some carbonates are made, not born V. PAUL WRIGHT , PW Carbonate Geoscience, 18 Llandennis Avenue, Cardiff, CF23 6JG, UK E-mail v.vpw btopenworld.com Natural Sciences, National Museum of Wales, Cardiff, CF10 3NP, UK Associate Editor Juan Ignacio Baceta ABSTRACT During the Aptian Cretaceous , in what is now the South Atlantic, the largest chemogenic abiotic carbonate factory so far identified in the Phanerozoic geological record developed as a vast hyper-alkaline lake system. This covered at least 330 000 km2, producing carbonates, locally over 500 m thick, in what are now the offshore Santos and Campos basins Brazil , and Kwanza Basin Angola . Current evidence supports the view that almost all of this carbonate was chemogenic in origin, precipitated from hyper-alkaline, shallow lake waters, probably by evaporation. This unit, best documented from offshore Brazil and known as the Barra Velha Formation Santos Basin and the Macabu Formation Campos Basin , consists of just two basic carbonate components, millimetre to centimetre sized crystal shrubs and spherulites. These are commonly in situ but can also be reworked into a range of detrital facies. Demonstrable microbialites are generally rare. These carbonates are associated with Mg silicates as clays which had a profound influence not only on the textural development of the in situ carbonates, but also on their diagenesis. The dissolution of the clays produced much of the porosity in these limestones, which are the hosts for multi-billion barrel oil fields. The source of the carbonate was most likely from metasomatic alteration of mafic rocks, such as continental flood basalts related to Atlantic opening, with some contribution from much older continental basement. Clear evidence that serpentinization of possible exhumed mantle is lacking but mantle CO2 is likely to have been a critical factor in determining the composition of the fluids from which the carbonates formed and the high alkalinities of the lake waters. Keywords Carbonate factory, CO2, Cretaceous, lacustrine, mantle, South Atlantic. INTRODUCTION The flux of Ca and Mg and dissolved inorganic carbon to the oceans, and ultimately to the marine carbonate systems, is controlled by the interaction of tectonics and atmospheric CO2 Arvidson et al., 2013, and references therein . In addition, it is not just the flux that is controlled by this interaction but also the mineralogy of chemogenic and biogenic carbonates, via Mg Ca, alkalinity and temperature, and even extinction events impacting on aragonite calcite Zhuravlev Wood, 2009 Balthasar Cusack, 2015 . The role of tectonics involves those large-scale processes affecting rates of continental crustal weathering but also seawater basalt reactions at spreading ridges, and also serpentinization of exhumed mantle. A view has been reached that 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists 47 48 V. P. Wright atmospheric CO2 levels are a critical factor in release of the required ions for carbonate accumulation, including high rates of volcanic degassing of CO2, which have been proposed as a critical factor in the high neritic carbonate preservation and production rates which characterize the midCretaceous Pohl et al., 2020 . Existing classifications of carbonate systems and factories focus mainly on the biotic, including microbial, marine examples, emphasizing ecological controls Schlager, 2003 Pomar Hallock, 2008 Michel et al., 2018 Laugi e et al., 2019 Pomar, 2020 . During the Archean to Palaeoproterozoic, however, extensive precipitation of chemogenic carbonates in marine settings took place Grotzinger James, 2000 . Less emphasis has been placed on lacustrine carbonates, especially the nature of their carbonate factories and sediment budgets see review in Pe echaty et al., 2013 . While the supply of their elemental components to non-marine carbonate systems, especially lakes, is also largely influenced by tectonics and atmospheric CO2, the nature of non-marine carbonate systems also reflects complex local hydrological and hydrogeological controls Fig. 1 . A critical influence on the chemical products of lacustrine systems is the nature of the catchment geology Hardie Eugster, 1970 . In endorheic closed lake basins the precipitates are influenced by the initial ion concentrations of the inflow waters and the types and amounts of minerals that precipitate, via chemical divides Hardie Eugster, 1970 . Although the diversity of precipitates in such lakes is well understood by reference to the influence of these divides, quite specific catchment geologies can produce unusual systems Cerling, 1994 . Such considerations are especially important as many large lake basins, past and present, are associated with rifting e.g. Owen et al., 2019 . The supply of water to such lakes comes from run-off, direct precipitation and groundwater recharge. For example, the large, evaporitic, carbonate producing Great Salt Lake rift basin in Utah USA , receives 66 of its water from runoff related to snowmelt in nearby mountains, with 31 from direct precipitation and only 3 from groundwater. However, in many balancefilled and underfilled rift basins groundwater-fed springs shallow meteoric or hydrothermal are common Owen et al., 2018 . An extreme example of a spring-filled lake is Nasikie Engida, to the north-west of Lake Magadi Kenya where an estimated 80 to 90 of inflow is from hot springs Owen et al., 2018 . Hydrothermal waters Hydrological System burial thermal history including geothermal input - gross facies distribution - sediment flux run-off volcanism nature of sediment detrital versus solute load chemistry of run-off lake waters fetch, prevailing wind leeward windward orientation Tectonics Catchment Geology role of groundwater versus run-off supply to lake accommodation space water depth endo exorheic drainage stratification Climate productivity chemical pathways for lake precipitates, also early diagenesis seasonality precipitation evaporation cyclicity vegetation faunal type Fig. 1. Simplified consideration of the major controls and interactions and how these affect depositional systems in lake basins modified from Wright Rodriguez, 2018 . 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 Aptian chemogenic lacustrine factory associated with magmatism are commonly alkaline and CO2 charged e.g. Lowenstein et al., 2016 . The balance between the solutes coming from run-off versus groundwater will also be affected by changes in evaporation precipitation and climate e.g. Mercedes-Mart n et al., 2019 . The aim of this study is to synthesize current knowledge on the Aptian giant lacustrine carbonate factory of the central South Atlantic, and propose that it reflects the direct influence of mantle-related CO2 on basement geology and volcanic catchments, resulting in a vast chemogenic carbonate factory, which seems to have had more in common with the Archean world than any other carbonate system, marine or nonmarine, in the Phanerozoic. GEOLOGICAL SETTING During the early Cretaceous, continental breakup associated with rifting created extensive lacustrine basins in what are now the South Atlantic marginal basins of the eastern seaboard of South America, and West Africa see review in Sabato Ceraldi Green, 2017 Kukla et al., 2018 . This established the related Santos Namibe basin system Fig. 2A , and the Esp rito Santo and Campos basins and their conjugates Strozyk et al., 2017 . The deposits of these lakes constitute the Guaratiba Group of Santos Basin, the Lagoa Feia Group of Campos Basin Fig. 2B and the TocaChela of West Africa Saller et al., 2016 . Initially, during the earlier rifting stage, alluvial Pic arras Formation and later lacustrine deposits Itapema Formation Fig. 2B were laid down in Santos Basin. These lakes were relatively deep, in which extensive mollusc coquinas developed e.g. Barnett et al., 2020 . During the later rift stage and the overlying sag phase Sabato Ceraldi Green, 2017 the lakes became highly restricted and alkaline Wright Barnett, 2015 . This unit is known as the Barra Velha Formation BVF in Santos Basin and is the focus of this study. Its equivalent in Campos Basin is the Macabu Formation, and elsewhere in Brazil the Codo Formation, and the Chela in Kwanza Basin, Angola. The BVF ranges in thickness from 550 m to as little as 55 m or is missing on fault block highs Wright Barnett, 2015 . The basement rocks of Santos Basin below the Cretaceous consist of the crystalline basement and younger basalts. The former are the 49 equivalent of outcrops in the Serra do Mar area in S ao Paulo state, which are mainly Precambrian granitoids and gneisses Moreira et al., 2007 . These are unconformably overlain by tholeiitic low Na basalts of the Cambori u Formation Fig. 2B which are likely Hauterivian Aptian in age Pietzsch et al., 2018 , and are also intercalated with the BVF in Santos Basin and its equivalent in Campos Basin Szatmari Milani, 2016 . On structural highs the BVF rests directly on basalts. The rifting that produced the lake basins may have resulted in their floors being possibly as much as 700 m below that of the contemporaneous sea-level Reston, 2010 . The BVF Alagoas Stage is separated from the Itapema Formation Jiqui a Stage by the PreAlagoas unconformity. Internally the BVF is divisible by the Intra-Alagoas unconformity, which is regarded as separating the informally defined Rift from Sag units. The BVF Fig. 2B is Aptian in age, within the Alagoas Stage in Brazil Moreira et al., 2007 Winter et al., 2007 Petersohn Abelha, 2013 and, based on this, was deposited between 123 to 115 Ma e.g. Wright Barnett, 2020 . Tedeschi et al. 2017 have suggested that the uppermost part of the BVF coincides with the onset of the Oceanic Anoxic Event 1a OAE 1a , so before ca 120 Ma or below ca 125 Ma, according to different calibrations. Pietzsch et al. 2018, fig. 2 regard the age of the BVF as between 123 to 112 Ma. They later Pietzsch et al., 2020 , by comparisons of the C isotope curves from Well S10 from Santos Basin and the Cismon core Italy , imply deposition of the BVF as likely 125 to 128 Ma and prior to the onset of OAE 1a ca 120 to 119 Ma . The BVF is overlain by the Ariri Formation, a package of over 1 km of marine-derived evaporites representing the Cretaceous ocean seeping and pouring into the basin Davison et al., 2012 . The climate during the Aptian and Albian in this southern part of the central South Atlantic is regarded as having been arid Lentini et al., 2010 Chaboureau et al., 2012 . The facies assemblage which comprises the BVF is recorded from the Campos Herlinger et al., 2017 and Kwanza basins Saller et al., 2016 Sabato Ceraldi Green, 2017 and there is even a minor development in the Cod o Formation of the Parnaiba Basin in north-eastern Brazil Bahniuk et al., 2015 . An estimate based on the extent of the BVF facies assemblage in the three basins Santos, Campos and Kwanza suggests that the carbonate system was potentially active over at least 330 000 km2. 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 50 V. P. Wright DEMOCRATIC A REPUBLIC Espi rito Santo Basin Kwanza Basin Namibe Basin Santos Basin Rio G ANGOLA ra nd e Rise Wal idge v is R Pelotas Basin Walvis Basin NAMIBIA 1000 km ZAMBIA Chronostratigraphy GTS 2012 115 Barremian Retiro Barra Velha Macabu Jiquia Buracica Itapema Pic arras Intra-Alagoas Pre-Alagoas Coqueiros Atafona 131 Hauterivian Unconformities Alagoas 118 126 Ariri LAGOA FEIA GROUP Aptian Lithostratigraphy Santos Campos GUARATIBA GROUP LOWER CRETACEOUS CONGO Campos Basin Rio de Janeiro B OF Top Lower Rift Top Camboriu Aratu Camboriu Cabiu nas Fig. 2. A Location map of Santos Basin and related basins. B Lower Cretaceous stratigraphic chart for the Santos and Campos basins after Moreira et al., 2007 Winter et al., 2007 . While the BVF has been referred to informally as the Microbialites e.g. Kattah, 2017 , Wright Barnett 2015, 2020 have, for Santos Basin, provided data on the paucity of evidence for microbialites based on the examination of 3502 thin sections from 19 wells and 10 oil fields and drilled structures. Microbialite facies from units immediately below the Ariri salt and its equivalents, in what appear to be more marginal marine depositional systems, have been provided by Muniz Bosence 2015 from the Macabu Formation of the southern Campos Basin, as well as from the Muribeca Formation Aptian of the Carm opolis field, Sergipe Alagoas Basin by De 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 Aptian chemogenic lacustrine factory Araujo et al. 2012 , and the Cod o Formation of the Parnaiba Basin by Bahniuk et al. 2015 . Hunt et al. 2019 report biogenic microbialites and breccias deposited in a range of saline to alkaline lake waters from Campos Basin, represented by diverse microbial and related features not seen in the BVF and its equivalents. PLATFORM SETTING OF THE BARRA VELHA FORMATION The gross depositional setting for the carbonates of the BVF is the subject of debate. Based on seismic data, a number of authors have interpreted the facies characterizing the BVF and its equivalents as representing deposition on isolated carbonate platforms within relatively deep lacustrine basins, with elevations of the platforms of hundreds of metres der Mann Rigg, 2012 Buckley et al., 2015 Saller et al., 2016 Sabato Ceraldi Green, 2017 Kattah, 2017 Vieira de Luc et al., 2017 Ferreira et al., 2019 . As a result, some authors have proposed distributions of key lithofacies based on the view that such facies would be differentiated on shallow platform tops Saller et al., 2016 Sabato Ceraldi Green, 2017 and even populating reservoir models on that basis de Paula et al., 2017 . The evidence used to identify the existence of isolated high relief platforms has come from their current structural positions on fault blocks and from clinoformal geometries implying depositional relief. While lacustrine carbonate systems are capable of producing small-scale platformlike depositional geometries Platt Wright, 1991 , such as from the Eocene of the Bohai Bay Basin, China Liu et al., 2020 , the relief on such platforms was decametre in scale at best and stratigraphically thick successions are not recorded. Shallow water lacustrine carbonates are known to have developed on pre-existing structural relief and hence were adjacent to deeper lake waters such as in the Toca of the Congo Basin, West Africa for example see Wright, 2012 . The three basins in which the distinctive facies characterizing the BVF developed are structurally complex with many studies highlighting potential effects that can make interpreting seismic features and tectonic history far from straightforward. These include the extension discrepancy and polyphase faulting discussed by Reston 2009 and McDermott Reston 2015 . The effects of outer margin 51 collapse Pindell et al., 2014, 2018 during the late Albian are another consideration and could have triggered deformation affecting the BVF and produced relief on the top of that unit, easily misinterpreted for depositional topographic relief. Alves et al. 2017 record, from Santos Basin, the effects of inversion when normal faults, formed during the syn-rift stage were later reactivated as low and high-gradient reverse faults and pop-up anticlines. On some seismic lines, inversion structures, related to normal faults, intersect the base salt, and significant erosion took place locally at the top reservoir level, above the area where inversion is recorded. Karner Gamboa 2007 record faulting and erosion having affected the BVF prior to salt deposition. Davison et al. 2012 record many small normal fault offsets at the base salt level, a small number with offsets of more than 1 km. Later rapid salt deposition and movement gravitational gliding caused significant fault reactivation and enhanced structural relief along the base of the salt Davison et al., 2012 Alves et al., 2017 . An additional issue is that volcanics can produce a range of seismic features readily misinterpreted as carbonate in origin such as clinoforms and mounds Wright Barnett, 2017 . Thus, identifying depositional topography in the BVF and its equivalents requires careful screening. One approach to this is to apply the methodology and criteria developed for identifying marine isolated carbonate build-ups by Burgess et al. 2013 . Although very little is known about seismic geometries associated with lacustrine carbonates, either modern day or in the stratigraphic record, if light dependent microbialites were the major sediment producers for the BVF facies, the approach by Burgess et al. 2013 should be applicable, as their focus was largely on the behaviour of tropical, phototrophic carbonate factories. Those published studies describing isolated platforms in the BVF and its equivalents have not used any such approach in their published interpretations. Wright Rodriguez 2018 provide a discussion of these issues in relation to the BVF in Santos Basin. Wright Barnett 2017 stressed that no modern lacustrine carbonate systems produce large differentiated platforms, but that there are examples of isolated, sub-lacustrine and subaerial mounds, the former at least of seismic-scale see below . Those authors also discussed issues relating to the apparent presence of clinoforms in Santos Basin, which might be used as 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 52 V. P. Wright evidence of high relief carbonate margins. The main evidence for the absence of any significant relief during deposition of the BVF came from a correlation of shallow water facies for 180 km west to east across Santos Basin using the package of carbonates at the top of the BVF with a distinct gamma log pattern known in the industry as Lula s Fingers. This package is 20.8 to 28.5 m thick mean 24.3 m , and shows nine gammadefined cycles mean thickness 2.7 m , which comprise one or more shallowing-upward cyclothems. These are well sampled by core and side wall core SWC and their facies are very similar in all wells, including a range of unequivocally shallow water facies for example, microbial laminites and stromatolites Wright Barnett, 2017 Pietzsch et al., 2020 . This suggests that as these cyclothems were deposited at the same shallow water depths, and because such conditions prevailed across the basin, by inference, there were no deeper off-platform areas. At present some of these sections are separated by 1 km vertical relief indicating significant post-depositional deformation. An important issue here is that almost all of the data in the public domain about the BVF and its equivalents comes from wells positioned on what are now structural highs. This might suggest that these data sets are skewed to shallow water settings, as the correlations by Wright Barnett 2017 show, and no data is available from locations off the highs. Except for the facies in the Lula s Fingers interval, the BVF and its equivalents contain few indicators for water depth other than wave influenced grainstones rudstones, and associated facies described below. The close stratigraphic association of the more common BVF facies with these grainstones rudstones suggests that water depths were indeed shallow. Further support comes from C and O isotope studies, using the approach initially developed for East African lakes by Talbot 1990 , that indicate the BVF carbonates were deposited in lakes with a large area depth, that is, shallow Sabato Ceraldi Green, 2017 Wright Barnett, 2017 Pietzsch et al., 2018, 2020 and, as discussed below, strongly affected by evaporation. If the BVF facies represent shallow interiors of isolated carbonate platforms adjacent to large and deep water bodies, these interiors were isolated, hydrologically, from the deeper lake system, if that ever existed during BVF times. If the BVF represents deposition in a shallow lake, from C and O stable isotopes and 87Sr 86Sr data from the Campos and Santos basins e.g. Pietzsch et al., 2018, 2020 , Lima et al. 2020 propose that either a single vast lake existed or that the lakes were hydrogeologically connected. There are what appear to be high relief isolated mounds in Santos Basin described by Buckley et al. 2015 and Barnett et al. 2018 with seismic relief of 400 m. The mounds are fractured and karstified and are associated with faults, forming over fault-related antecedent highs. The cores of these features consist of in situ shrubs see below with surrounding deposits of grainstones, rudstones and, less commonly, packstones and floatstones composed of reworked shrubs, with platy, angular and wellrounded intraclasts mainly comprising centimetre to decimetre-scale fragments of in situ shrub cementstones. Grain-size is mainly coarsegrained to very coarse-grained to pebble-grade, with poor to moderate sorting with sub-rounded to rounded grains. Packages of beds commonly show elevated dips of ca 20 to 40 , and show normal grading but mainly lack internal stratification. Barnett et al. 2018 interpreted these reworked carbonates as colluvial wedges resulting from the subaerial disaggregation of mounds. Souza et al. 2018 , referring to such occurrences, cite formation in a low-temperature hydrothermal and evaporitic environment, linked to ascending Ca Mg Si rich fluids emerging in subaerial and sub-lacustrine springs. There are some issues arising from the occurrence of these features. Firstly, they do not appear to show the range of textures and geometries associated with subaerial tufas or travertines, and their scale is unlike any such features known today. Thick subaerial travertine deposits are known from, for example, the Ballik area, Denizli Basin in West Anatolia, Turkey Claes et al., 2015 , but consist of stacked travertine wedge units with diverse internal facies now well documented from many parts of the world e.g. Della Porta et al., 2017a,b . High relief, isolated lacustrine carbonate build-ups are known from modern lakes such as Pyramid Lake in Nevada, which can be 100 m high, and are now accessible because of lake level falls, but formed sub-aqueously, typically around vents discharging Ca-rich waters into carbonate-rich lakes. These features have complex internal differentiation Della Porta, 2015 DeMott et al., 2018 , seemingly unlike those in Santos Basin which appear in part strongly layered from published seismic images. The features described by Barnett et al. 2018 were also located near faults, strengthening a link to 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 Aptian chemogenic lacustrine factory sub-lacustrine discharge zones. These authors proposed a partial analogue with similar mounds from Searles Lake in California described by Guo Chafetz 2012 , which also have prominent debris aprons produced by the weathering of tufa deposits. These reach heights now of up to 45 m, but are mainly 5 to 12 m high. The critical issue here is that these features require lake waters of similar depths to their heights, which if those in Santos Basin formed in a similar setting, requires the lakes to have been 400 m deep, although exposed at some later stage. Modern lakes in closed-basin settings can undergo remarkable fluctuations in lake level, such as the Great Salt Lake of Utah and its Pleistocene precursors Benson et al., 1992 . If the Santos isolated mounds did at least in part form in a deeper lake, their textural similarities to those elsewhere in the BVF is surprising. If, as currently interpreted these textures formed close to wave base and were affected by strong evaporation see below , their presence in a deeper setting is unusual. Another possibility for the relief of these features seen on seismic could be that what is being seen is stratigraphic not topographic, in the sense that they appear to have relief on seismic but developed as stacked, composite low relief features, that were undergoing contemporaneous erosion around their flanks, as reflected in the associated debris deposits. COMPOSITION The main components of the BVF have been extensively documented from Santos Basin Terra et al., 2010 Wright Barnett, 2015, 2020 Tanaka et al., 2018 Farias et al., 2019 Azer edo et al., 2021 Barnett et al., 2018, in press , and equivalents of the BVF from the Campos and Kwanza basins Saller et al., 2016 Sabato Ceraldi Green, 2017 Herlinger et al., 2017 Lima De Ros, 2019 . As a consequence, what follows is only a brief summary. The typical appearance in core is of commonly heterogeneous interlayering of centimetre to metre-scale in situ and reworked calcite components with Mg-silicate clays mainly stevensite and talc , with primary and replacement dolomites and silica, and porosity. What is most striking is that the formations are composed of almost only two basic components millimetre to centimetre-sized fascicular structures Fig. 3A and B resembling crystal shrubs recorded from travertines Chafetz Guidry, 53 1999 , producing cementstone textures associated locally with sub-millimetre to millimetre-thick isopachous laminae of coalesced fibrous calcite, and millimetre-scale radiating calcite spherulites Fig. 3C and D . Shrubs Wright Barnett 2020 record, from a study of 10 wells in the Lula area, a mean bed thickness for the shrub-bearing lithologies of 0.51 m, with 65 exhibited in situ shrubs and 35 as reworked shrubs. The former are identified by having their elongate crystals broadly perpendicular to the substrate, although they develop a range of radiating, branched and even plumose growth forms. The latter consists of a range of fragmented shrub material in rudstone, grainstone to wackestone and floatstone textures with or without calcite matrices. The in situ shrubs are separated by open pore space, or filled with Mg-silicates, or silica cement or dolomite. Where porosity is present, in some cases dolomite rhombs occur in the pore spaces like those found closely associated with the in situ spherulites. The shrubs grew off isopachous fibrous calcite laminae, or grew due to the asymmetrical growth of spherulites Herlinger et al., 2017 Lima Ros, 2019 , or from detrital carbonate material. The shrubs exhibit sweeping extinction Fig. 3B , with a radial fibrous structure and also locally resemble radiaxial fibrous or fascicular optic calcite. The calcites have very high densities of very fine fluid inclusions, which impart pseudo-pleochroism. As is the case for the spherulites, some recrystallization has taken place but there is no evidence for an aragonite precursor. Such branching growth in calcite, and crystal splitting, reflect kinetic controls Bastianini et al., 2019 , and are typical of precipitates from highly saturated alkaline solutions e.g. Rainey Jones, 2009 Jones Peng, 2012 . The range of calcite crystallographic features suggests growth from probably somewhat differing conditions and fluid compositions, but at high precipitation rates as noted for radiaxial fibrous and fascicular optic calcites Richter et al., 2011 . Wright Barnett 2015 proposed an abiotic origin for the shrubs based on the absence of any evidence of a biological including microbial origin. In subsequent detailed studies this view has been validated Herlinger et al., 2017 Lima Ros, 2019 Farias et al., 2019 Hosa et al., 2020 . However, Sabato Ceraldi Green 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 54 V. P. Wright A B 1 mm 1 mm C D 500 m 1 mm E P S 500 m Fig. 3. Barra Velha Formation A shrubs in plane polarized light showing inter-shrub porosity blue resin and some dissolutional porosity is present within the shrubs B as in A but in cross-polarized light C spherulites in plane polarized light set in a Mg-silicate matrix with magnesite bridge-like structures and dolomite crystals D spherulites showing magnesite bridge-like structures within the porosity blue resin which formed after Mg-silicate dissolution E laminated carbonate mudstone calcimudstone showing in lower part laminae and nodules composed of microquartz S and compressed bone remains P . 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 Aptian chemogenic lacustrine factory 2017 tentatively regarded the shrub facies from the BVF equivalents in the Kwanza and South Campos basins as microbialites. Studies of travertines with fibrous textures resembling the BVF shrubs by, for example Shiraishi et al. 2019 and Jones Peng 2012 supported the view that such textures are predominantly abiotic chemogenic in origin. While similar textures are seen in modern active travertines, isotopic evidence suggests that the calcites were not precipitated from thermal waters Farias et al., 2019 Barnett et al., 2018, in press Pietzsch et al., 2020 although data from the mounded examples described by Barnett et al. 2018 is not available. The lack of evidence for a microbial origin for the shrubs does not imply that the lake waters were without microbes such as extremophiles, but that there is currently no evidence that they played any role in inducing carbonate growth, although very subtle influences cannot be completely ruled out, but should not simply be assumed. The change in growth morphology from spherulites to shrubs was interpreted as indicating that the latter grew unrestricted and without a surrounding gel see below Wright Barnett, 2015 Lima Ros, 2019 , although the presence of Mg-silicates between some shrubs and also of dolomites implies that some deposition of gel may have occurred during or after shrub growth. Spherulites The spherulites Fig. 3C and D are composed of radiating fibrous calcite spheres, and reach diameters of up to 15 mm, but are more commonly 2 mm. They occur in units averaging 0.54 m thick in the Lula area wells studied by Wright Barnett 2020 , in three main textural associations. Most striking is where the spherulites occur in a clay matrix floatstone with Mgsilicate clay matrices, which possess delicate bridge-like features composed of magnesite and also numerous dolomite rhombs Fig. 3C . These same textures occur without the clay matrices, which are now represented by porosity Fig. 3D . These two lithofacies constitute around 60 of spherulite facies Wright Barnett, 2020 . The remaining 40 consist of fragmented, abraded grains in rudstone, grainstone, packstone to wackestone or floatstone textures commonly associated with fragmented shrubs. Wright Barnett 2015 proposed that the spherulites were chemogenic and, based on published experimental studies, were the product of 55 rapid crystal growth in alkaline solutions, highly enriched in Mg and silica, in some form of viscous medium, which provided the support for the growing spherulites. The presence of Mg-silicate clay matrices, which formed in such fluids, originally as gels Tosca Wright, 2015 Wright Tosca, 2016 supports such a model. Spherulites in the BVF in a Mg-clay matrix and or associated with bridge-like structures, have been interpreted as in situ spherulites, that is, having grown within a precursor matrix Wright Barnett, 2020 . Further studies on the Aptian spherulitic facies by Herlinger et al. 2017 and Lima Ros 2019 , from northern Campos Basin, and Farias et al. 2019 from Santos Basin, supported the explanation provided by Wright Barnett 2015 . The case for the matrices, although now Mg-clays, having originally been gels is based not only on the experimental work but also on the fact that if the matrices were formed as clays then detrital clay material, such as clay clasts, should be associated with the reworked carbonates. These are effectively never seen with some very rare exceptions. As gels, the matrices were dispersed during reworking into the water column. An analogy can be made here with flint in Cretaceous shelf chalks these chalk muds were commonly syndepositionally reworked, but flints originally formed as silica gels are rarely found reworked. However, the textural relationships and origins of the spherulites have been the subject of considerable debate see review in Wright Barnett, 2020 . The main disagreements revolve around two issues. The first relates to the view that the spherulites did not require a gel in which to form but the case for their growth in a former gel-like matrix is addressed in detail, using textural evidence in Wright Barnett 2020 . The second issue is that many researchers have insisted that the spherulites were microbially nucleated for example, MercedesMart n et al., 2017 Rogerson et al., 2017 Chafetz et al., 2018 Kirkham Tucker, 2018 . To date no evidence has been presented for any direct microbial influence on these textures from the BVF and its equivalents, and Herlinger et al. 2017 , Lima Ros 2019 and Farias et al. 2019 have also emphasized the absence of such evidence. The Aptian Cod o Formation of the Parnaiba Basin in north-east Brazil contains microbialites and thin units with spherulites associated with Mg-clay and dolomite matrices Bahniuk et al., 2015 . These authors also note the absence of 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 56 V. P. Wright any direct evidence of microbial activity associated with the spherulites Bahniuk et al., 2015 . Microbialites Microbialites stromatolites, dendrolites, oncoids and microbial laminites occur in the BVF in Santos Basin and are normally only found in the uppermost 20 to 30 m of the formation the Lula s Fingers . An abundance of data on the frequency of microbial macrostructures and microstructures from a large set of BVF samples have been provided by Wright Barnett 2015 , with microbial macrostructures encountered in never more than 1 of thickness of logged core from the Lula area, to microscopic evidence as low as seen in 0.05 of components of thin sections. Hasiuk Kaczmarek 2015 presented geochemical analyses from samples from Well BMS-22 Guarani-1ST 3-ESSO-004-SPS in Santos Basin, which they interpreted as supporting a microbial influence. This author has examined samples from that well and can confirm that microbial textures are common and readily identified, making that well highly unusual for the BVF as a whole. Muniz Bosence 2015 , from a very small data set from the Macabu Formation the BVF equivalent in south Campos Basin, record possible microbialites, and Hunt et al. 2019 also report microbialites from that basin. These studies raise the possibility that microbialites may be locally more significant in both Santos and Campos basins. The rarity of microbial textures has been discussed by Wright Barnett 2020 and related to the high alkalinity identified by the occurrence of the Mg-silicate stevensite, because its precipitation requires pH levels as high as 10 to 10.5 Tutolo Tosca, 2018 . Calcification around what appear to have been cyanobacterial sheaths is seen in the microbialites in the BVF Wright Barnett, 2020 but is missing in association with shrubs and spherulites e.g. Farias et al., 2019 . The absence of such specific microtextures in modern alkaline lakes is a consequence of high levels of DIC dissolved inorganic carbon Arp et al., 2001 . What is also striking is the near complete absence of micropeloidal and clotted micrite textures, which are so widely documented in known and inferred microbialites. Such textures are typically interpreted as resulting from carbonate precipitation triggered by bacterial sulphate reduction, but the operation of such processes in inducing carbonate precipitation has been questioned by Meister 2014 especially in alkaline settings see also Gallagher et al., 2013, and Meister, 2014 . A preservational factor needs to be considered, as Jones Peng 2012 , documenting shrub textures dendrite bushes from geothermal springs in China, report that even though microbes and microbial mats were present, they had a low preservation potential in association with shrublike growths. Those authors cite other examples of this effect from other hot spring deposits. Thus, the BVF shrubs and spherulites appear to have been chemogenic and abiotic in origin, but the lakes may well have contained microbial life, evidence of which was not preserved. Magnesium silicates However, the origin of the Mg-silicates needs consideration and Wright 2012 highlighted the role of microbial processes in the formation of Mg-silicates in volcanic-influenced settings. Farias et al. 2019 also did not exclude microbial involvement in the formation of Mg-silicates in the BVF. A number of examples of Mg-silicates associated with microbial mats have been reported for example Jones Peng, 2012 Burne et al., 2014 Pace et al., 2016 Zeyen et al., 2017 Perri et al., 2018 Hubert et al., 2018 JaramilloVogel et al., 2019 Kremer et al., 2019 . No microbial textures have been reported associated with the Mg-silicates in the BVF Wright Barnett, 2020 . Tutolo Tosca 2018 have questioned whether microbial processes are capable of producing the large volumes of these Mg-silicates seen in the BVF where they can or did once constitute a high proportion of the rock volume, especially in the in situ spherulite facies such occurrences can be hundreds of metres thick. Associated carbonates As noted above, the shrubs and spherulites are commonly not in situ, having been reworked. The origin of these poorly sorted and rounded grains is unclear, but suggests little winnowing or transport, and could reflect decomposition by exposure and weathering, rather than by waves or currents. While the products of this reworking are mainly poorly sorted rudstones to wackestones and floatstones, there are two distinct lithologies of particular note laminated calcimudstones and highly texturally mature grainstones and rudstones Wright Barnett, 2015, 2020 . 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 Aptian chemogenic lacustrine factory Laminated calcimudstones, composed of a fine detritus of spherulites and shrubs occur in two types. The first and more widespread Facies 3a of Wright Barnett, 2020 occurs in thin units, typically less than 0.3 m, of silt-grade carbonate or finer, with silt-sized quartz, clays commonly green , lacking organic matter, finely laminated with rare desiccation cracks, locally with abundant carapaces of non-marine euryhaline ostracods, and phosphatic material including rare complete small fish Polck et al., 2020 . Much of the phosphatic material consists of millimetrelong, millimetre diameter bone-like fragments Fig. 3E . Where not compacted, these fragments are filled with carbonate matrix, and would have been hollow, these being hollow raises the possibility that they were the remains of juvenile birds or pterosaurs. Replacive displacive pre-compaction centimetre-sized silica nodules and layers are common Fig. 3E , composed mainly of microquartz, but with as much as 10 , very finely disseminated pyrite, commonly as framboids. The fine-grained nature of this facies suggests likely accumulation in a protected setting or possibly below wave base. The presence of desiccation cracks suggests periodic exposure but such features are rare. In contrast to the shrub and spherulite-bearing facies, the presence and local abundance of non-marine euryhaline ostracods suggests that the lakes may have become sufficiently less hostile to allow colonization, by fresher water inputs. The presence of well-preserved fish and other vertebrate remains is further support for this interpretation. Barnett et al. 2018 reported lighter oxygen isotope values for this facies see below , further supporting the view of some influx of less evaporated, possibly meteoric waters. Wright Barnett 2015 proposed that the early silica nodules and sheets represented the interstitial precipitation of silica gels during freshening intervals when the pH of the lake waters decreased, as is seen in some modern lakes Renaut, 2003 , although there is no evidence that this silica in the BVF was associated with microbial mats, as has been suggested for some African lakes such as Lake Magadi Behr, 2002 . The disseminated pyrite and framboids suggest the possibility that bacterial sulphate reduction, associated with an increase in organic activity, as indicated by ostracods and fish remains, may have occurred, which could have locally lowered the pH e.g. Meister, 2013 to trigger silica precipitation. The other laminated calcimudstone facies Facies 3b of Wright Barnett, 2020 has been 57 encountered only rarely to date where most of the data comes from wells that are proximal to structural highs. These decametre-thick units with varved and graded laminae, sub-metre thick graded beds resembling turbidites, lack ostracods, fish remains and early silica nodules, but are associated with thin organic laminae. This facies likely represents settings affected by sediment gravity flows. The highly texturally mature grainstones and rudstones Facies 5 of Wright Barnett, 2020 have been documented by Barnett et al. 2018, in press and occur in decametre-scale units composed of well-sorted and well-rounded grains of shrubs, spherulites, intraclasts and, in some cases, peloids and volcanic fragments. These grainstones and rudstones exhibit sharp-based, decimetre to metre-scale fining-upward packages with, planar low-angle stratification, and less common cross-lamination and planar cross-bedding. This facies type is associated with marked thinning of the BVF around margins of tilted fault blocks and is interpreted as wave-dominated fan delta shoreline deposits by Barnett et al. 2018, in press , and possibly spits. Aspects of the limited range of components There are several outstanding features about the composition of the BVF that require some attempt to explain. In most wells there is a paucity or even lack of what one might regard as normal carbonate components such as micrite and sparite. In addition, considering the abundance of calcite precipitates, ooids are extremely rare. A likely explanation is that carbonate nucleation was suppressed by kinetic inhibition favouring growth at existing sites Wright Tosca, 2016 see also Bastianini et al., 2019 . The main primary components of the BVF were calcite and Mg-silicates especially stevensite, a trioctahedral smectite but if evaporation played a critical role in producing some or all of the key components see below , the basic question needs to be asked as to why more typical evaporite minerals are missing, especially sulphates and chlorides This has been addressed by Wright 2012 citing Cerling 1994 who, using data from lakes in the East African Rift, emphasized that volcanic catchments are poor in sulphates and chlorides. Cerling 1994 proposed that where volcanic terrains predominate, calcite, tri-octahedral smectite, analcime and various bicarbonate carbonate minerals would be the main primary 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 58 V. P. Wright minerals, and the outboard rifted settings of the South Atlantic Cretaceous basins would provide such a setting. The absence of sulphates such as gypsum could be explained if the HCO3 of the lake waters was very high relative to Ca2 as may have been the case in the Archean Grotzinger Kasting, 1993 , and the influence of high pCO2 levels will be discussed later. Mercedes-Mart n et al. 2019 have suggested that the absence of sulphates and chlorides in the BFV lakes reflects the effects of stationary leakage flux to the underlying aquifers, while the model proposed by Farias et al. 2019, fig. 18 of seawater seepage would have produced sulphates and chlorides in the BVF lakes. Finally, siliciclastic material is uncommon see also Gomes et al., 2020 , suggesting that the likelihood of any sediment from the adjacent continents was trapped before reaching the lakes. Volcanic clasts are present in the wellsorted grainstone facies Barnett et al., 2018 . Diagenesis The diagenesis of the BVF-type facies has been discussed in general terms by Tosca Wright 2015 , who suggested that much of the diagenesis could relate to the decay of stevensite. In Santos Basin, a prominent phase of later stage carbonate dissolution took place enhancing porosity and permeability in the reservoirs, after several phases of replacement and cementation by silica and dolomite. A contributor to this dissolution might have been the decay of the Mgsilicates, which can result in the release of hydrogen ions Tosca Wright, 2015 . The role of the salt cover promoting geothermal convection, during and after salt deposition has been investigated by Jones Xiao 2013 using reactive transport modelling, raising the possibility that some of the dissolution could have been driven by such convection. Detailed studies by Herlinger et al. 2017 , Vieira de Luc et al. 2017 , Tritlla et al. 2018 , Lima De Ros 2019 and Lima et al. 2020 , have emphasized the extensive hydrothermal overprint seen in the Campos Basin relative to that in the Santos Basin. Saller et al. 2016 and Teboul et al. 2017 have also assessed the role of such effects in the Kwanza Basin. Classifying the Barra Velha rock types Providing a robust classification for these carbonates presents several problems. As discussed by Wright Barnett 2020 , the growth of the spherulites within a Mg-silicate matrix see also Herlinger et al., 2017 Lima De Ros, 2019 creates an unusual type of texture, which after the congruent dissolution of the Mg-silicate of the matrix Tosca Wright, 2015 leaves what apparently could be described as a porous grainstone or even boundstone. To address some of these terminological problems Wright Barnett 2020 have proposed a simple classification that includes consideration of the porosity, while Gomes et al. 2020 have offered a more detailed system and also discuss non-carbonate detrital components. Azer edo et al. 2021 also provide another approach to classifying the textures in the BVF. CYCLICITY AND DEPOSITONAL SETTING As stated earlier, the distinctive suite of lithofacies characterizing the BVF and its equivalents have been identified in Santos, Campos and Kwanza basins. Besides the lack of any analogue for this scale of chemical sedimentation, the lack of sedimentary indicators of water depth has hampered initial attempts to define the depositional setting. A critical step in interpreting the BVF came with the discovery of cyclothems in some wells Wright Barnett, 2015 Figs 4 and 5 . These authors noted a statistically tested pattern of repetition of three lithologies in metre-scale units ostracod-bearing laminites facies 3 of Wright Barnett, 2015 , overlain by in situ spherulite facies 2 , overlain by in situ shrubs facies 1 . Wright Barnett 2015 proposed that the cyclothems likely represented flooding and evaporation cycles. Initially an influx of water, probably as run-off, deepened the lakes to below wave base allowing fine-grained carbonate to accumulate. It is important to note that wave base in lakes is commonly shallower than in marine systems because of the reduced fetch. This influx also lowered the alkalinity salinity sufficiently for ostracods and vertebrates to colonize the lakes, these were likely to have been introduced from more permanent water bodies such as nearby streams or other lakes. The reduced alkalinity triggered silica precipitation see above . The overlying spherulite-bearing units were first deposited as Mg-silicate gels Tosca Wright, 2015 Wright Tosca, 2016 , requiring a shift to highly alkaline waters with 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 Aptian chemogenic lacustrine factory 59 0.1 m shrubs 10 mm spherulites spherulites laminites 10 mm 10 mm Fig. 4. Core image of cyclothem in Barra Velha Formation top of cyclothem is 0.4 m above top of core stick. Cyclothems 0.75 5 m thick Thin well-sorted grainstones composed of shrub and spherulite debris and intraclasts 13C 18O Reduction of gel precipitation allows rapid growth of calcite shrub cementstones Calcite shrub cementstones, with Mg-silicates or patchy traces of former Mg-silicates Evaporation triggers Mg-silicate gel precipitation pH 9. Mg is rapidly depleted. Spherulites nucleate in Mg-silicate gels with Mg-silicates or traces of former Mg-silicate matrices Laminated calcimudstones with prominent ostracods and vertebrate debris, early silicate nodules Flooding phase reduced alkalinity vertebrates also triggers silica precipitation as pH drops M W P G F R C 0 1 2 3 1 0 1 2 Fig. 5. Typical cyclothem found in the Barra Velha Formation from Santos Basin based on Wright Barnett, 2015 Barnett et al., 2018, in press . 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 60 V. P. Wright pH of 10 or above. The spherulites, Wright Barnett 2015 proposed, grew in this gel and in many cases seeded the shrubs in the overlying shrub layer see also Herlinger et al., 2017 Lima De Ros, 2019 Farias et al., 2019 . Most gels would likely have been deposited and accumulated below wave base but were also likely to have been periodically reworked. At some stage, gel precipitation stopped or decreased, possibly because of Mg depletion, or changed pH levels Wright Barnett, 2015 . Many of the in situ shrubs have open porosity but, as noted above, there is evidence that some shrubs likely had Mgclay matrices Wright Barnett, 2015 . An explanation could be that during the growth of the shrubs any gel material would have been removed by wave action as a result of progressive shallowing. Finally, in the upper part of the cyclothems, shrub growth also ceased. This could have been triggered by several mechanisms, such as decreases in CO2 content of groundwaters e.g. Jones Peng, 2012 . In some cyclothems, the shrub units are overlain, seemingly non-erosively, by centimetre-thick, well-sorted grainstones composed of shrub and spherulite debris, then sharply overlain by laminites. Support for this evaporation model came from thermodynamic modelling Wright Tosca, 2016 , which indicated that the progression from Mg silicate formation to calcite precipitation could result from concentration by evaporation. Barnett et al. 2018, in press have provided C and O stable isotope profiles for the cyclothems Fig. 5 , which indicate a progressive enrichment in C13 and O18 during the cyclothem, commensurate with an evaporation trend. If, as this data suggests, the carbonate laminites have lighter values than those from the spherulites or shrubs, which contain fine fragments of these grain types, some lighter carbon was added, which might imply that carbonate was precipitated during that freshening phase. Pietzsch et al. 2020 from a single well data set from Santos Basin, note a lack of direct correspondence between lithofacies and isotopic composition but suggest that evaporative conditions prevailed including the suggestion that inflow waters became enriched in d13C due to evaporation. One problem with this evaporative model relates to the known distribution of shrub-dominated facies. If the shrub facies represents the more evaporative phase of the lake, it should, based on existing models for the distribution of lake evaporites for example, Renaut Gierlowski-Kordesch, 2010 , be limited to those parts of the system where more evaporated waters would have pooled, that is, in areas with lower topographies hence the bulls-eye model for lake evaporite distribution . However, shrub facies are often best developed in more up-dip areas for example Barnett et al. in press , fig. 12 . Figure 6 is an attempt to explain this apparent anomaly by considering also the effects of changing water depth and wave action as lake waters fell. However, this model might also produce shrubs with different C and O isotopic values having begun forming during different stages of evaporation, or suggest that individual shrubs might also show such changes. If the shrub facies represented the peak of evaporation it is noteworthy that such units, from this author s experience, do not display evidence of erosion or exposure, but Gomes et al. 2020 note that a key feature of the tops of these cyclothems are irregular surfaces which may or may not have been subaerially exposed . Fig. 6. A model for the development of cyclothems in the Bara Velha Formation. Stage 1 filling of the lake by waters of reduced alkalinity salinity, introducing conditions conducive to euryhaline ostracods and fish. The lowering of the pH triggered precipitation of interstitial silica gels which later formed silica nodules. The lighter oxygen isotope values in this unit suggest precipitation of some calcite from these less evaporated waters as compared with the values found in the spherulites and shrubs. The accumulation of fine-grained carbonates implies deposition in a lower energy setting, probably below wave base. Earlier deposits were reworked in shallower areas along wave-dominated shorelines. Stage 2 represents the point when evaporation triggered the formation and deposition of Mg-silicate gels, which are assumed to have been deposited below wave base. During the contraction of the lake it is assumed that wave base may also have been shallower as fetch decreased. Stage 3 the precipitation of calcite, as spherulites within the gels below wave base, and locally updip as shrubs where gels were not accumulating or had been removed by falling wave base. This is based on the observations that shrub facies are better developed, with commonly larger shrubs, in updip areas near minor palaeo-topographic highs. Stage 4 gel deposition may have ceased and spherulite growth reached the sediment water interface allowing shrubs to grow further shrub growth took place in shallower settings. Later local progradation of shoreline grainstones covered the shrubs capping the cyclothems. 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 Aptian chemogenic lacustrine factory 1 initiation of shoreline grainstones LL reworking of earlier deposits WB calcite precipitation ostracods silica gels interstitial 2 laminated carbonate muds LL development of shoreline grainstones WB deposition of Mg-silicate gels 3 LL WB 4 nucleation of calcite spherulites LL nucleation of shrubs partial burial by shoreline grainstones WB continued growth of shrubs cessation of gel deposition, shrubs nucleate from spherulites LL lake level WB wave base 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 61 62 V. P. Wright Azer edo et al. 2021 describe the effects of early dissolution on the shrub facies from the BVF, possibly linked to their disintegration, which might support the view that this shrub phase terminates each evaporation cycle. There have been other explanations for the spherulite to shrub change besides evaporation For example, Tosca et al. 2018 suggested that the spherulite to shrub transition could have arisen due to water column stratification, triggered perhaps through freshwater influx to a dense, saline water body because they considered that the spherulites required higher states of saturation than shrub growth based on the effects of diffusive fluxes and nucleation rates on crystal growth. The role of stratification and its breakdown by mixing and upwelling has been invoked for large-scale chemogenic precipitation in Archean to Palaeoproterozoic ocean basins by Grotzinger Knoll 1995 . The distribution of the shrubs might be better explained if they formed during periods of rising lake level and Gomes et al. 2020 have suggested that wetter periods in the basins, with rising or higher lake, would have reduced alkalinity and favoured shrub formation. This does not explain the isotopic data shown by Barnett et al. 2018, in press . Gomes et al. 2020 raise another important issue in proposing that, besides the commonly identified trend for an upward increase in shrubs Wright Barnett, 2015 Farias et al., 2019 Lima De Ros, 2019 , they also identified an upward-increasing spherulite trend. These authors have also incorporated changes in the detrital content and have offered several possible scenarios to explain facies changes humid to arid trend invoking the evaporative model upward increase in shrubs semi-arid arid model whereby the shrubs formed during a less evaporitic phase, followed by further evaporation by spherulites upward-increasing spherulite trend , and lastly a constant lake level model whereby changes such as those seen in the main components were the result of changes in aeolian fluvial detrital input, pH and lake stratification, induced by climate change. The second model as noted by Gomes et al. 2020 is related to that proposed by Farias et al. 2019 from a study of a small 50 m data set from one Santos Basin well SB-2 . These authors suggested that the laminite facies formed during a flooding stage, followed by evaporation resulting in shrub growth, and Mgsilicate precipitation. Further evaporation led to complete desiccation Farias et al., 2019, fig. 14 and the growth of displacive spherulites, and apparently halite precipitation. However, this mechanism does not explain the widely reported fact that many shrubs nucleated off spherulites, or the lack of desiccation features in the spherulite facies, and that the calcite pseudomorphs after halite reported by these authors appear to be dolomite compare fig. 13 of Farias et al., 2019 with those of similar textures described as dolomite in Saller et al., 2016 Herlinger et al., 2017 Lima De Ros, 2019 Wright Barnett, 2020 Gomes et al., 2020 . Gomes et al. 2020 reinforce the point inherent in the application of an evaporation-driven model Wright Barnett, 2015 , that the spherulites with Mg-silicates formed during particular stages of lake development. This raises a conceptual problem if one interprets them as contemporaneous, as is implied in the models presented by Saller et al. 2016 , de Paula Faria et al. 2017 and Sabato Ceraldi Green 2017 . Tanaka et al. 2018 also offer a facies model that identifies the shrub facies as stromatolites, which formed in shallower settings than spherulites. However, these authors relate the laminite facies to the shallowest settings and make no reference to its biota. This model is based on the brief interpretations provided in de Paula et al. 2017 . Modern closed system lakes such as that envisaged for the BVF facies have three potential water sources run-off, direct precipitation and groundwater recharge. The importance of these inputs varies between different lakes and also with time, related to climate changes. The deposition of the laminites Facies 3 of Wright Barnett, 2015 suggests that some local run-off took place, bringing in little non-carbonate sediment, but able to dilute the lake waters and introduce vertebrates and ostracods. As regards evidence for large-scale groundwater injections, to date no clear examples of vents have been described from the BVF, although in Campos Basin some seismic features, including what appear to be isolated mound-like build-ups in the earlier rift stage, have been interpreted as hydrothermal vent complexes by Alvarenga et al. 2016 , and the isolated high relief mounds in Santos Basin described by Buckley et al. 2015 and Barnett et al. 2018 , discussed earlier, might be related to sub-lacustrine vents. However, in modern lakes groundwater input can be significant, such as in some modern rift lakes such as Nasikie Engida see above , and Farias et al. 2019 have used clumped isotope 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 Aptian chemogenic lacustrine factory analyses to suggest that the BVF carbonates recorded in Well SB-2 formed in the range 46 to 73 C, so are likely the products of thermal springs. Pietzsch et al. 2020 concluded, using standard C and O isotopic data from the BVF that the isotopic signal for the BVF carbonates was from evaporation of lake waters that had undergone long residence times. If the carbonate and silica-charged fluids had been sourced via thermal vents, those waters were likely not precipitating near the vents. Mercedes-Mart n et al. 2019 have argued that the evaporation model proposed by Wright Tosca 2016 , based on the cyclothems described by Wright Barnett 2015 , could not be produced simply by evaporation from a single freshening evaporite cycle. Those authors used data from Lake Baringo to show that 25 to 50 fluctuations would be required to produce the cycles. While suggesting that such metre-scale cyclothems reflected evaporation as supported by the isotope data in Barnett et al., 2018, in press , Wright Tosca 2016 did not imply that the cycles were the product of a single event. Here an analogy can be made, with suggesting that a peritidal carbonate cyclothem represents the product of one tide. However, Wright Tosca 2016 did not provide an explanation as to the hydrological setting that could generate such metre-thick cyclothems, which apparently indicate a simple, if prolonged, evaporation trend. Mercedes-Mart n et al. 2019 suggested that the facies cyclicity recognized in BVF largely reflects temporal fluctuations in the type of waters sourcing the lake and in the degree of leakage to aquifers, rather than variations in the lake water concentration factor due to evaporation. If groundwater were a major source of the lake water, thermal or not, what could be being reflected in the cyclothems is initially a freshening deepening phase of the BVF lakes, likely a result of input from run-off introducing fish and ostracods from streams or other refugia , followed by the increasing effect of water derived from groundwater input, plus evaporation. This could be readily tested by analysing the 87 Sr 86Sr ratio of each carbonate phase to detect changes in the provenance. Intriguing as these important cyclothems are, they are not the dominant features of the BVF, which consists of a highly heterogeneous mix of in situ and reworked components, often in poorly rounded and sorted grain wackestone textures, with ill-defined units lacking evidence of exposure and diagnostic sedimentary 63 structures, except for the mature grainstones, interpreted as fan deltas and spit deposits as documented by Barnett et al. 2018, in press . If these in situ and reworked lithofacies are reflecting formation under different water depths, with or without changes driven by evaporation, they are indicating a highly dynamic system. This is not unexpected in shallow, closed lake systems where water depth changes, over geologically short time intervals, can range from decametres or more, over hundreds of years, to metres on a decadal scale or even less. These changes reflect fluctuations in rainfall, snow melt although not in the case of the BVF , and hence run-off or groundwater discharge, evaporation rates and of changes in the natural connections between nearby lake segments. Metre-scale fluctuations are commonly encountered around lakes due to variations in wind direction. The Pleistocene to present day history of the Great Salt Lake in Utah being such an example of the remarkable changes that can occur in water depths, at different scales Gwynn, 1998 . The variability in styles of lithofacies ordering in the BVF, as shown by Wright Barnett 2015 , Gomes et al. 2020 and Azer edo et al. 2021 , and the general heterogeneity, is likely an indicator of such restricted conditions and of the interplay of minor topographic variations with complex hydrological and physical factors, including stratification. It is clear that the origins of the BVF facies are not the subject of universal agreement, whether in relation to the sources of their components, or to the gross depositional environment, as well as the hydrological implications of the cyclothems. In broadest terms two somewhat contradictory models can be invoked Fig. 7 the deep lake model, based mainly on seismic facies see above and the shallow lake model based on facies analysis, geochemical evidence C and O isotopes and correlation studies. The task of deciding which, if any, model works, and indeed whether that model would be expected to work over such a huge area, is hampered by the lack of any modern or ancient analogue including seismic analogues for possible large lacustrine buildups , the paucity of depth indicators and the biased nature of the data coming from structural highs, let alone the structural complexity of these basins. However, there has been an imperative for such models coming from the exploration for oil in these basins. Whatever large-scale model is invoked, the current consensus is that the carbonate factory 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 64 V. P. Wright linear build-ups along major faults A deep 300 m lake platforms F F shallow evaporitic alkaline lake B low gradient ramp-like deposition C metre-scale cyclothems super-mature sand-grade carbonates deposited as shoreface and spit complexes shrub facies evaporation spherulite facies . . . .... . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . .. .. coarser reworked carbonates fan deltas laminites shallow hyper-alkaline lake . . . . . . . fault-related eroded mounds with thicker shrub development Fig. 7. The use of the scale-less obligatory block diagram to help visualize the broad depositional models invoked for the Barra Velha Formation and its equivalents. A The deep lake model, differentiated platform model invoked by various authors see text , in which estimates of water depths have been based on interpretations of dipping reflectors as carbonate slope clinoforms. B The shallow lake model, with possible facies distributions shown in C at greater detail. 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 Aptian chemogenic lacustrine factory was overwhelmingly abiotic, that is, chemogenic. If extremophiles were present, as seems likely even in such alkaline conditions, the evidence for their involvement, direct or indirect, in carbonate precipitation is lacking and, no matter how topical it is to invoke many carbonate features as the product of microbial processes or the influence of microbial substrates such as extracellular polymeric substances EPS , any evidence-based interpretation must currently favour an abiotic origin. This makes the vast BVF and its equivalents a somewhat rare, almost unique, carbonate factory in Earth history, and certainly in the Phanerozoic. DISCUSSION THE BVF FACTORY The early Aptian Albian Cretaceous is regarded as an interval when high rates of volcanic CO2 in the atmosphere led, via high rates of silicate weathering, to high rates of shallow water carbonate production in the oceans Pohl et al., 2020 . However, the lakes which produced the BVF and its equivalents were not linked to the Aptian oceans. If such enhanced weathering from elevated levels of atmospheric CO2 had supplied the BVF factory, the limited range of precipitates suggests a predominantly basic igneous source area, yet little detrital material from such a source, or any major non-carbonate source, entered the deposystem therefore subaerial weathering seems an unlikely process generating the chemistry of the lakes. If a consensus exists in the studies on this chemistry, it is that these lakes were at times hyper-alkaline, with pH of 10 or even above. This alkalinity requires explanation, an issue in other ancient hyper-alkaline lake systems as noted by Lowenstein et al. 2017 , who identified several possible mechanisms whereby hyper-alkalinity could arise. Periods of high atmospheric CO2 levels triggering accelerated weathering could provide the alkalinity, as noted by Farias et al. 2019 , potentially enhanced by the sub-sea-level elevation of the lake basins. Magmatic activity introducing alkaline Na HCO3 -rich hydrothermal waters is another mechanism and operates within basins such as Lake Magadi, Kenya, or at distance such as Searles Lake, California Lowenstein et al., 2016 . Lowenstein et al. 2017 also noted that high levels of organic decay in lakes could provide a source for CO2-related alkalinity, but adding that such organic activity in modern lakes 65 had not created hyper-alkalinity. In fact high input of CO2 producing high levels of dissolved inorganic carbon has been invoked more recently as potentially promoting high organic productivity, carbonate formation, alkalinity and the production of Mg-smectites in some lakes Milesi et al., 2019, 2020 . Milesi et al. 2019, 2020 and Wright Barnett 2020 suggested that inputs of magmatic CO2 into the lakes represented by the BVF carbonates could have influenced carbonate and non-carbonate deposition by creating extreme carbonate and bicarbonate alkalinities. High alkalinities are common in evaporitic lakes where magmatic CO2 input is high Pecoraino et al., 2015 . Carbon dioxide is present in these South Atlantic basins of Brazil and, in one field, CO2 was found to be up to 80 in the gas cap Gamboa et al., 2019 . The bulk of the CO2 in these Atlantic margin basins of Brazil has been shown to be of mantle origin e.g. Santos et al., 2012 , and that wells located near major intracrustal intrusions contain the highest amount of CO2, which has been interpreted as likely sourced from the mantle during late Cretaceous and early Eocene times Gamboa et al., 2019 . The volcanic activity that was associated with the deposition of the BVF and its equivalents Szatmari Milani, 2016 would have likely provided an additional source for CO2 and carbonate alkalinity. Lima et al. 2020 have discussed the possibility that CO2 could have been supplied from the upper mantle or serpentinization. Szatmari Milani 2016 , while suggesting that leaching by phreatic and hydrothermal waters and erosion of flood basalts supplied Ca2 , Mg2 and SiO2 for the BVF facies, identified mantle CO2 released later in the Cretaceous and Eocene as the cause of hypogenic leaching to produce reservoir quality. However, CO2 from the mantle was likely actively entering the BVF lakes, and also introducing leachate as bicarbonate from underlying units, during formation of the BVF. Pietzsch et al. 2020 discuss in detail the isotopic fractionation, composition, trends and origins of C and CO2 in the BVF, including a mantle origin. These authors note that in the BFV lakes equilibrium took place between lake water DIC reservoir and atmospheric CO2, that required long water residence times coincident with evaporitic shallow lake waters. Studies of the active CO2-rich Lake Dziani Dzaha, Mayotte, Indian Ocean Milesi et al., 2019, 2020 have shown that magmatic CO2 provides a large contribution to the dissolved organic carbon in the 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 66 V. P. Wright lake, promoting primary productivity, high alkalinities, carbonate formation and the formation of Mg-silicates, albeit on a smaller scale than the BVF lakes. There is a case that the alkalinity in the BVF lakes was at least influenced by magmatic and mantle CO2, with that CO2 both contributing directly to the lake waters, and also as an agent for leaching a mafic-rich source to provide the elemental suite required for the mineralogy of the BVF. As stated above, the BVF lakes lacked non-carbonate terrigenous input other than minor amounts of silicates, which suggests that subaerial weathering was not the source of the lake chemistry. Here 87Sr 86Sr data provides insights into the provenance of that chemistry. Pietzsch et al. 2018 , Farias et al. 2019 and Obermaier et al. 2019 provide 87Sr 86Sr data from carbonates that shows values significantly higher more radiogenic than Cretaceous marine values. The more radiogenic values in the BVF preclude either the involvement of a mantle or oceanic basalt source, and that serpentinization was likely not involved in sourcing the BVF carbonates. Because the 87Sr 86Sr ratios are too radiogenic compared with continental flood basalts in the region, Pietzsch et al. 2018 suggest that felsic rocks from the basement and or alluvial material derived from it were likely also contributing ions. As Pietzsch et al. 2018 acknowledge, the lack of significant detrital sediment in the BVF suggests that direct input from erosion and surface transport from local catchments and rivers seems unlikely, whereas the radiogenic values could reflect waters that had long residence times in acidic bedrock aquifers, as noted by Ojiambo et al. 2003 from east Africa. These authors present a model using mass-balance calculations to show that a felsic source had likely contributed with fluxes one to two, and up to four, orders of magnitude higher than the mafic source. This would likely require sourcing from the Precambrian basement. Tutolo Tosca 2018 have suggested that waters with high concentrations of silica and alkali cations typical of intermediate to felsic rocks, such as Na and K, would be needed to produce the Barra Velha mineral suite. However, Lima et al. 2020 raise the problem that invoking a felsic source, such as the underlying granitic gneissic basement, would not provide a suitable source for the abundant Mg and Ca in the BVF and its equivalents. Pietzsch et al. 2018 also identify a trend towards more radiogenic values from the Jiqui a to Alagoas stages Itapema to BVF , while Obermaier et al. 2019 report a clear shift to more radiogenic values across the pre-Alagoas unconformity, and that the overlying evaporites of the Ariri Formation indicate a trend to more marine values. Lima et al. 2020 provide a compilation of 87Sr 86Sr data from Campos and Santos basins that also shows the trend towards more radiogenic values into the Barra Velha and Macabu formations. This more radiogenic signature in the BVF relative to the Itapema contrasts with the interpretation by Farias et al. 2019 that the BVF represents an initial transitional stage ending with the deposition of halite and bittern salts of the marine-related Ariri Formation. Lima et al. 2020 report that, as isotopic data from different studies were similar over a regional scale in Campos and Santos basins, this raises the possibility that the BVF represents either single vast lake or lakes that were hydrogeologically connected. The possibility of some involvement of serpentinization of exhumed mantle requires some discussion, because some travertine carbonates are associated with exposed ophiolite complexes and serpentinization e.g. Leleu et al., 2016 . Pinto et al. 2017 have asked whether the Ca and Mg necessary to build the Aptian carbonates in the region were related to fluids derived from serpentinization. Zal an et al. 2011 identified an extensive zone of exhumed mantle in Santos, Campos and Esp rito Santo basins, and proposed that serpentinization had taken place, but others have questioned the exhumation of the mantle in the region Kumar et al., 2012 Evain et al., 2015 . Pindell et al. 2018, fig. 6 implies that exhumation occurred syn-salt deposition and not before. The 87Sr 86Sr ratios of the BVF carbonates do not indicate a mantle or oceanic basalt source, but Lima et al. 2020 have invoked the possibility of some involvement of fluids related to serpentinization to explain the lower 87Sr 86Sr ratios observed in the later hydrothermal diagenetic phases compared with those of the primary carbonates in the BVF facies in Campos Basin. On an even larger scale, the relationship of the BVF lake chemistry to changes in global CO2 and OAE 1a Oceanic Anoxic Event 1a has also been discussed Tedeschi et al., 2017 Pietzsch et al., 2020 , and the issue arises as to whether the BVF lakes were passive witnesses to that event or that magmatic mantle CO2 and its release from the formation of the BVF carbonates 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 Aptian chemogenic lacustrine factory from highs low precipitation 67 high evaporation CO2 degassing hyper-alkaline lakes Precambrian basement mantle-derived CO2 bicarbonate-rich hydrothermal Fig. 8. An attempt to illustrate the hydrology of the Barra Velha Formation, emphasizing the role of mantle CO2 and fluids in producing this unique but areally-extensive non-marine carbonate factory. had any impact on that event Tedeschi et al. 2017 have provided arguments in favour of deposition of the topmost part of BVF at the onset of OAE 1a. Pietzsch et al. 2020 suggest that the negative d13C trend observed in the upper part of Well S10 in Santos Basin would correspond to the onset of the OAE 1a, and increased atmospheric CO2, and might have favoured the predominance of the microbial sedimentation instead of inorganic precipitation in the upper BVF 3 as is seen in the Lula s Fingers, see above . There is uncertainty over the exact ages of the BVF see Geological setting and of OAE 1a Jenkyns, 2018 . The increase in atmospheric CO2 associated with OAE 1a has been attributed mainly to sustained mantle eruptions by Adloff et al. 2020 , and has been directly attributed to volcanism related to the Ontong Java Plateau e.g. Erba et al., 2015 . It remains to be determined if the vast scale of the BVF might imply an additional, South Atlantic source for this CO2. Some fundamental issues relating to the basic hydrology of the lakes remain unclear. Where did the water come from, because there is little evidence of run-off transport other than the carbonate dominated fan deltas inferred by Barnett et al. in press Could water have been provided by direct precipitation or were vents a more likely source To date no examples of travertine or tufa facies have been described from the BVF, although the limited amount of rock recovered relative to the extent of this formation and its equivalents is a key consideration. These vents, charged with mantle CO2, would have had to have tapped into deep seated fluids leaching both the felsic basement and shallower mafic volcanics, as envisaged by Pietzsch et al. 2020 . In summary, the chemogenic BVF factory was unique amongst lacustrine deposystems in Earth history in terms of its scale and volume, but the Archean to Palaeoproterozoic also saw extensive precipitation of chemogenic carbonates in marine settings Grotzinger James, 2000 . These have been attributed to high partial pressure of CO2 and alkalinities in the oceans Grotzinger Kasting, 1993 , and strong ocean stratification and upwelling triggering carbonate precipitation Grotzinger Knoll, 1995 . As illustrated in Fig. 1, the complex interactions of play of tectonics, relief, heat flow and volcanism likely active during the evolution of 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 68 V. P. Wright lake basins, coupled with climatic controls, global atmospheric CO2 levels and variations in the composition of the country rock, all likely interact to produce complex hydrological and hydrochemical scenarios. The BVF factory provides an example of such complexity, yet has a simple, if unique character more like the Archean than the Phanerozoic marine systems. This factory was the product of the complex process domain of a hyper-extended rifted margin, with a thinned crust and high heat flow, possibly in basins as much as 700 m or more below contemporaneous sea level. These basins had limited local run-off and siliciclastic input, and the 87 Sr 86Sr ratios found in the carbonates suggest chemical sources from Cretaceous mafic volcanics and much older underlying basement but not contemporaneous oceans, in an endorheic system as discussed by Pietzsch et al. 2018, 2020 . The BVF sediments reveal little about their depths of formation except for some waveinfluenced grainstones rudstones around structural highs. Hyper-alkaline lake waters, produced by high levels of CO2, concentrated, at least in part, by evaporation, triggered the formation of Mg-silicate gels, whose presence or absence influenced the associated calcite textures, which indicate a predominance of abiotic chemogenic textures. Hyper-alkalinity was likely driven by high CO2 levels, possibly directly into the lakes, but also as bicarbonate related to underlying and interbedded mafic-rich volcanics Fig. 8 . Carbon dioxide levels were also linked to global CO2 events. CONCLUSIONS The vast Aptian hyper-alkaline lake systems of the central South Atlantic apparently have no analogues in the stratigraphic record and show more similarities with extensive chemogenic Archean early Proterozoic marine carbonates than any known non-marine system. Many aspects remain controversial. There is still disagreement over how to interpret the seismic expression of these lake deposits, with some groups favouring the former presence of high relief, differentiated carbonate platforms rising many hundreds of metres above the lake basin floors. Others favour formation in shallow evaporitic lakes, with additional influences such as changes in chemoclines, or in the changed ratios of fluid sources. The chemogenic nature of the carbonates is still a contentious issue, although the apparent paucity of microbial textures may reflect the high alkalinities and rapid precipitation rates evidenced by the mineral composition and textures. Another uncertainty relates to the formation of the Mg clays, which influenced carbonate textures, later diagenesis and porosity formation, because both chemogenic and microbially-influenced origins have been proposed. The problematic textures have required some researchers to propose new approaches to classification for these hybrid lithologies. The sources for the lake chemistry are unresolved with the likelihood that hydrothermal, CO2-rich fluids released from the mantle, leached felsic basement and mafic volcanics, without any influence of marine waters or major fluvial influx. Global CO2 levels likely also influenced these lakes, which themselves likely released mantle CO2. The Barra Velha Formation BVF and its equivalents are an example of an extreme system, on a vast scale, due to a seemingly unique combination of mainly tectonically driven processes. Some carbonates are made, not born. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I thank the editors of this special issue for the invitation to provide a synthesis on this controversial and highly unusual carbonate factory. The author has greatly benefited from many discussions with former BG Group colleagues, especially Andrew Barnett, and Nick Tosca Cambridge University . My sincere thanks to the anonymous reviewers and editors for their efforts to improve this paper. Susan MarriottWright is thanked for drafting the diagrams. REFERENCES Adloff, M., Greene, S.E., Parkinson, I.J., Naafs, B.D.A., Preston, W., Ridgwelle, A., Lunta, D.J., Jim enez, J.M.C. and Monteiro, F.M. 2020 Unravelling the sources of carbon emissions at the onset of Oceanic Anoxic Event OAE 1a. Earth Planet Sci. Lett., 530, 115947. Alvarenga, R.S., Iacopini, D., Kuchle, J., Scherer, C.M.S. and Goldberg, K. 2016 Seismic characteristics and distribution of hydrothermal vent complexes in the Cretaceous offshore rift section of the Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Mar. Pet. Geol., 74, 12 25. Alves, T.M., Fetter, M., Lima, C., Cartwright, J.A., Cosgrove, J., Gang, A., Queiroz, C.L. and Strugale, M. 2017 An incomplete correlation between pre-salt topography, top reservoir erosion, and salt deformation in deep-water Santos Basin SE Brazil . Mar. Pet. Geol., 79, 300 320. 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 Aptian chemogenic lacustrine factory Arp, G., Reimer, A. and Reitner, J. 2001 Photosynthesisinduced biofilm calcification and calcium concentrations in Phanerozoic oceans. Science, 292, 1701 1704. Arvidson, R.S., Mackenzie, F.T. and Guidry, M.W. 2013 Geologic history of seawater A MAGic approach to carbon chemistry and ocean ventilation. Chem. Geol., 362, 287 304. Azer edo, A.C., Duarte, L.V. and Silva, A.P. 2021 The challenging carbonates from the Pre-Salt reservoirs offshore Brazil facies, palaeoenvironment and diagenesis. Journal of South American Earth Sciences, 108, 103202. Bahniuk, A.M., Anjos, S., Franca, A.B., Matsuda, N., Eiler, J., McKenzie, J.A. and Vasconcelos, C. 2015 Development of microbial carbonates in the Lower Cretaceous Codo Formation north-east Brazil implications for interpretation of microbialite facies associations and palaeoenvironmental conditions. Sedimentology, 62, 155 181. Balthasar, U. and Cusack, M. 2015 Aragonite-calcite seas Quantifying the gray area. Geology, 43, 99 102. Barnett, A.J., Obermaier, M., Amthor, J., Juk, K., Camara, R., Sharafodin, M. and Bolton, M. 2018 Origin and significance of thick carbonate grainstone packages in nonmarine successions a case study from the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin. AAPG Search and Discovery Article 11116. Barnett, A.J., Fu, L., Rapasi, T., Scotellaro, C., Guha, J., Cabolova, A. and Domingues, A.L. 2020 Seismic characterisation and origin of clinoforms in lacustrine depositional environments a case study from the Cretaceous of the South Atlantic. In Seismic Characterisation of Carbonate Platforms and Reservoirs Eds Hendry, J., Burgess, P., Janson, X. and Zampetti, Y. , Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 509. Barnett, A.J., Obermaier, M., Amthor, J., Sharafodin, M., Bolton, M., Clarke, D. and Camara, R. 2018 Origin and Significance of Thick Carbonate Grainstone Packages in Non-Marine 1 Successions A Case Study from the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin. Mem AAPG., in press. Bastianini, L., Rogerson, M., Mercedes-Mart n, R., Prior, T.J., Cesar, E.A. and Mayes, W.M. 2019 What causes carbonates to form shrubby morphologies An Anthropocene limestone case study. Front. Earth Sci., 7, 19. Behr, H.J. 2002 Magadiite and Magadi-chert a critical analysis of the silica sediments in the Lake Magadi basin, Kenya. In Sedimentation in Continental Rifts Eds Renaut, R.W. and Ashley, G.M. , SEPM Spec. Publ., 73, 257 273. Benson, L., Currey, D., Lao, Y. and Hostetler, S. 1992 Lakesize variations in the Lahontan and Bonneville basins between 13,000 and 9000 14C yr B.P. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol., 95, 19 32. Buckley, J.P., Bosence, D.W.J. and Elders, C. 2015 Tectonic setting and stratigraphic architecture of an Early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonate platform, Sugar Loaf High, Santos Basin, Brazil. In Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production Eds Bosence, D.W.J., Gibbons, K.A., Le Heron, D.P., Morgan, W.A., Pritchard, T. and Vining, B.A. , Geological Society, London, Spec. Publ., 418, 175 191. Burgess, P.M., Winefield, P., Minzoni, M. and Elders, C. 2013 Methods for identification of isolated carbonate buildups from seismic reflection data. AAPG Bull., 97, 1071 1098. Burne, R.V., Moore, L.S., Christy, A.G., Troitzsch, U., King, P.L., Carnerup, A.M. and Hamilton, P.J. 2014 Stevensite in the modern thrombolites of Lake Clifton Western Australia a missing link in microbial mineralization Geology, 42, 575 578. 69 Cerling, T.E. 1994 Chemistry of closed basin lake waters a comparison between African Rift Valley and some central North American rivers and lakes. In The Global Geological Record of Lake Basins Eds GierlowskiKordesch, E.H., and Kelts, K. , pp. 29 30. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Chaboureau, A.-C., Donnadieu, Y., Sepulchre, P., Robin, C., Guillocheau, F. and Rohais, S. 2012 The Aptian evaporites of the South Atlantic a climatic paradox Clim. Past., 8, 1047 1058. Chafetz, H.S. and Guidry, S.A. 1999 Bacterial shrubs, crystal shrubs and ray crystal shrubs bacterial v. abiotic precipitation. Sediment. Geol., 126, 57 74. Chafetz, H.S., Barth, J., Cook, M., Guo, X. and Zhou, J. 2018 Origins of carbonate spherulites implications for Brazilian Aptian pre-salt reservoir. Sediment. Geol., 365, 21 33. Claes, H., Soete, J., Van Noten, K., El Desouky, H., Erthal, M.M., Vanhaecke, F., Ozkul, M. and Swennen, R. 2015 Sedimentology, three-dimensional geobody reconstruction and carbon dioxide origin of Pleistocene travertine deposits in the Ball k area south-west Turkey . Sedimentology, 62, 1408 1445. Davison, I., Anderson, L. and Nuttall, P. 2012 Salt deposition, loading and gravity drainage in the Campos and Santos salt basin. In Salt Tectonics, Sediments and Prospectivity Eds Alsop, G.I., Archer, S.G., Hartley, A.J., Grant, N.T. and Hodgkinson, R.R. , Geological Society, London, Spec. Publ., 363, 159 174. De Araujo, C.C., Moretti, P.A., Madrucci, V., Da Silva, N.C., Toczeck, A. and Almeida, A.B. 2012 Pre-salt facies in the Carmopolis Area, Northeast Brazil stratigraphy and depositional model. AAPG Search and Discovery Article 50544. Della Porta, G. 2015 Carbonate build-ups in lacustrine, hydrothermal and fluvial settings comparing depositional geometry, fabric types and geochemical signature. In Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production Eds Bosence, D.W.J., Gibbons, K.A., Le Heron, D.P., Morgan, W.A., Pritchard, T. and Vining, B.A. , Geological Society, London, Spec. Publ., 418, 17 68. Della Porta, G., Capezzuoli, E. and De Bernardo, A. 2017a Facies character and depositional architecture of hydrothermal travertine slope aprons Pleistocene, Acquasanta Terme, Central Italy . Mar. Pet. Geol., 87, 171 187. Della Porta, G., Croci, A., Marini, M. and Kele, S. 2017b Depositional architecture, facies character and geochemical signature of the Tivoli travertines Pleistocene, Acque Albule Basin, Central Italy . Riv. It. Paleontol. Strat., 123, 487 540. DeMott, L.M., Muirhead, J.D. and Scholz, C.A. 2018 Reservoir Properties of Lacustrine Carbonate Buildups from Pleistocene Lake Lahontan Analogues for South Atlantic Reservoirs. AAPG Search Discovery Article 30585. der Mann, J. and Rigg, J.W.D. 2012 New geological insights into the Santos Basin. Geo. ExPro., 9, 38 40. Erba, E., Duncan, R.A., Bottini, C., Tiraboschi, D., Weissert, H., Jenkyns, H.C. and Malinverno, A. 2015 Environmental consequences of Ontong Java Plateau and Kerguelen Plateau volcanism. In The Origin, Evolution, and Environmental Impact of Oceanic Large Igneous Provinces Eds Neal, C.R., Sager, W.W., Sano, T. and Erba, E. , Geological Society of America Spec. Pap., 511, 271 303. 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 70 V. P. Wright Evain, M., Afilhado, A., Rigoti, C., Loureiro, A., Alves, D., Klingelhoefer, F., Schnurle, P., Feld, A., Fuck, R., Soares, J., de Lima, M.V., Corela, C., Matias, L., Benabdellouahed, M., Baltzer, A., Rabineau, M., Viana, A., Moulin, M. and Aslanian, D. 2015 Deep structure of the Santos Basin-S ao Paulo Plateau System, SE Brazil. J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 120, 5401 5431. Farias, F., Szatmari, P., Bahniuk, A. and Franc a, A.B. 2019 Evaporitic carbonates in the pre-salt of Santos Basin genesis and tectonic implications. Mar. Pet. Geol., 105, 251 272. Ferreira, D.J.A., Lupinacci, W.M., de Neves, I.A., Zambrini, J.P.R., Ferrari, A.L., Gamboa, L.A.P. and Azul, M.O. 2019 Unsupervised seismic facies classification applied to a presalt carbonate reservoir, Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. AAPG Bull., 103, 997 1012. Gallagher, K.L., Dupraz, C. and Visscher, P.T. 2013 Two opposing effects of sulfate reduction on carbonate precipitation in normal marine, hypersaline, and alkaline environments Comment. Geology, 42, 313 314. Gamboa, L., Ferraz, A., Baptista, R. and Santos Neto, E.V. 2019 Geotectonic Controls on CO2 Formation and Distribution Processes in the Brazilian Pre-Salt Basins. Geosciences, 9, 252. Gomes, J.P., Bunevich, R.B., Tedeschi, L.R., Tucker, M.E. and Whitaker, F.F. 2020 Facies classification and patterns of lacustrine carbonate deposition of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazilian Pre-salt. Marine Petrol. Geol., 113, 104176. Grotzinger, J.P. and Kasting, J.F. 1993 New constraints on Precambrian ocean chemistry. J. Geol., 101, 235 243. Grotzinger, J.P. and Knoll, A.H. 1995 Anomalous carbonate precipitates Is the Precambrian the key to the Permian Palaios, 10, 578 596. Grotzinger, J.P. and James, N.P. 2000 Precambrian carbonates evolution of understanding. In Carbonate Sedimentation and Diagenesis in the Evolving Precambrian World Eds Grotzinger, J.P. and James, N.P. , SEPM Spec. Publ., 67, 3 20. Guo, X. and Chafetz, H.S. 2012 Large tufa mounds, Searles Lake, California. Sedimentology, 59, 1509 1535. Gwynn, J.W. 1998 Great Salt Lake, Utah Chemical and Physical Variations of the Brine and Effects of the SPRR Causeway, 1966 1996, 1998. In Modern and Ancient Lake Systems New Problems and Perspectives Eds Pitman, J. and Carroll, A. , pp. 71 90. Salt Lake City, Utah Utah Geological Association. Hardie, L.A. and Eugster, H.P. 1970 The evolution of closed-basin brines. Mineral. Soc. Spec. Paper, 3, 273 290. Hasiuk, F.J. and Kaczmarek, S.E. 2015 Geochemical evidence of biotic influence in Brazilian pre-salt carbonates. AAPG Search and Discovery Article 51190. Herlinger, R.J., Zambonato, E. and De Ros, F.L. 2017 Influence of diagenesis on the quality of Lower Cretaceous Pre-Salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs of the northern Campos Bain, offshore Brazil. J. Sed. Res., 87, 1285 1313. Hosa, A., Wood, R.A., Corbett, P.W.M., Schiffer de Souzad, R. and Roemers, E. 2020 Modelling the impact of depositional and diagenetic processes on reservoir properties of the crystalshrub limestones in the Pre-Salt Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazil. Mar. Petrol. Geol., 112, 104100. Hubert, H.L., Rankey, E.C. and Omelon, C. 2018 Organic matter, textures, and pore attributes of hypersaline lacustrine microbial deposits Holocene, Bahamas . J. Sed. Res., 88, 827 849. Hunt, D.W., Vieira de Luca, P.H., Gomis-Cartesio, L.E., Lapponi, F., Masiero, I., Waldum, A., Stuart Chandler, A., De Lima Matias, J.L., Hess, C. and Fonseca, J. 2019 A very different Barremian-Aptian lacustrine Pre-Salt facies association biotic self-organization. In BMC-33, outer basin Campos Basin, Brazil First EAGE Workshop on PreSalt Reservoir from Exploration to Production 5 6 December 2019, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 5 pp. Jaramillo-Vogel, D., Foubert, A., Braga, J.C., Schaegis, J.-C., Atnafu, B., Grobety, B. and Kidane, T. 2019 Pleistocene sea-floor fibrous crusts and spherulites in the Danakil Depression Afar, Ethiopia . Sedimentology, 66, 480 512. Jenkyns, H.C. 2018 Transient cooling episodes during Cretaceous Oceanic Anoxic Events with special reference to OAE 1a Early Aptian . Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A, 376, 20170073. Jones, B. and Peng, X. 2012 Intrinsic versus extrinsic controls on the development of calcite dendrite bushes, Shuzhishi Spring, Rehai geothermal area, Tengchong, Yunnan Province, China. Sed. Geol., 249 250, 45 62. Jones, G.D. and Xiao, Y. 2013 Geothermal convection in South Atlantic subsalt lacustrine carbonates Developing diagenesis and reservoir quality predictive concepts with reactive transport models. AAPG Bull., 97, 1249 1271. Karner, G.D. and Gamboa, L.A.P. 2007 Timing and origin of the South Atlantic pre-salt sag basins and their capping evaporates. In Evaporites Through Space and Time Eds Schreiber, B.C., Lugli, S., and Bacbel, M. , Geological Society, London, Spec. Publ., 285, 15 35. Kattah, S. 2017 Exploration opportunities in the pre-salt play, Deepwater Campos Basin, Brazil. Sediment. Rec., 15, 4 8. Kremer, B., Kazmierczak, J. and Kempe, S. 2019 Authigenic replacement of cyanobacterially precipitated calcium carbonate by Al-silicates in giant microbialites of Lake Van Turkey Authigenic replacement of cyanobacterially precipitated calcium carbonate by aluminium-silicates in giant microbialites of Lake Van Turkey . Sedimentology, 66, 285 304. Kumar, N., Danforth, A., Nuttall, P., Helwig, J., Bird, D.E. and Venkatraman, S. 2012 From oceanic crust to exhumed mantle A 40 year 1970 2010 perspective on the nature of crust under the Santos Basin, SE Brazil. In Conjugate Divergent Margins Ed. Mohriak, W.U. , Geol. Soc. London Spec. Publ., 369, 147 165. Kirkham, A. and Tucker, M.E. 2018 Thrombolites, spherulites and fibrous crusts Holkerian, Purbeckian, Aptian context, fabrics and origins. Sedim. Geol., 374, 69 84. Kukla, P.A., Strozyk, F. and Mohriak, W.A. 2018 South Atlantic salt basins Witnesses of complex passive margin evolution. Gondwana Res., 53, 41 57. Laugi e, M., Michel, J., Pohl, A., Poli, E. and Borgomano, J. 2019 Global distribution of modern shallow-water marine carbonate factories a spatial model based on environmental parameters. Sci. Rep., 9, 16432. Leleu, T., Chavagnac, V., Delacour, A., Noiriel, C., Ceuleneer, G., Aretz, M., Rommevaux, C. and Ventalon, S. 2016 Travertines associated with hyperalkaline springs evaluation as a proxy for paleoenvironmental conditions and sequestration of atmospheric CO2. J. Sed. Res., 86, 1328 1343. de Paula, L., Faria, D., Reis, A.T. and Souza Jnr, O.S. 2017 Three-dimensional stratigraphic-sedimentological forward modelling of an Aptian carbonate reservoir deposited 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 Aptian chemogenic lacustrine factory during the sag stage in the Santos basin, Brazil. Mar. Pet. Geol., 88, 676 695. Lentini, M.R., Fraser, S.I., Sumner, H.S. and Davies, R.J. 2010 Geodynamics of the central South Atlantic conjugate margins implications for hydrocarbon potential. Petrol. Geosci., 16, 217 229. Lima, B.E.M. and De Ros, L.F. 2019 Deposition, diagenetic and hydrothermal processes in the Aptian Pre-Salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs of the northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Sedim. Geol., 383, 55 81. Lima, B.E.M., Tedeschi, L.R., Pestilho, A.L.S., Santos, R.V., Vazquez, J.C., Guzzo, J.V.P. and De Ros, L.F. 2020 Deepburial hydrothermal alteration of the Pre-Salt carbonate reservoirs from northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil Evidence from petrography, fluid inclusions, Sr, C and O isotopes. Mar. Pet. Geol., 113, 104143. Liu, S., Jiang, Z., He, Y., Dou, L., Yang, Y., Li, Y. and Han, C. 2020 Geomorphology, lithofacies and sedimentary environment of lacustrine carbonates in the Eocene Dongying Depression, Bohai Bay Basin, China. Mar. Petrol. Geol., 113, 104125. Lowenstein, T.K., Dolginko, L.A.C. and Garcia-Veigas, J. 2016 Influence of magmatic-hydrothermal activity on brine evolution in closed basins Searles Lake, California. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull., 128, 1555 1568. Lowenstein, T.K., Jagniecki, E.A., Carroll, A.C., Smith, M.E., Renaut, R.W. and Owen, R.B. 2017 The Green River salt mystery What was the source of the hyperalkaline lake waters Earth Sci. Rev., 173, 295 306. McDermott, K. and Reston, T. 2015 To see, or not to see Rifted margin extension. Geology, 43, 967 970. Meister, P. 2013 Two opposing effects of sulfate reduction on carbonate precipitation in normal marine, hypersaline, and alkaline environments. Geology, 41, 409 502. Meister, P. 2014 Two opposing effects of sulfate reduction on carbonate precipitation in normal marine, hypersaline, and alkaline environments Reply. Geology, 42, 315. Mercedes-Mart n, R., Ayora, C., Tritlla, J. and S anchezRom an, M. 2019 The hydrochemical evolution of alkaline volcanic lakes a model to understand the South Atlantic Pre-salt mineral assemblages. Earth-Sci. Rev., 198, 102938. Mercedes-Mart n, R., Brasier, A.T., Rogerson, M., Reijmer, J.J.G., Vonhof, H. and Pedley, M. 2017 A depositional model for spherulitic carbonates associated with alkaline, volcanic lakes. Gondwanan Res., 48, 101 109. Milesi, V.P., J ez equel, D., Debure, M., Cadeau, P., Guyot, F., Sarazin, G., Claret, F., Vennin, E., Chaduteau, C., Virgone, A., Gaucher, E.C. and Ader, M. 2019 Formation of magnesiumsmectite during lacustrine carbonates early diagenesis study case of the volcanic crater lake Dziani Dzaha Mayotte Indian Ocean . Sedimentology, 66, 983 1001. Milesi, V.P., Debure, M., Marty, N.C.M., Capano, M., J ez equel, D., Steefel, C.I., Rouchon, V., Alb eric, P., Bard, E., Sarazin, G., Guyot, F., Virgone, A., Gaucher, E.C. and Ader, M. 2020 Early diagenesis of lacustrine carbonates in volcanic settings the role of magmatic CO2 Lake Dziani Dzaha, Mayotte, Indian Ocean . ACS Earth Space Chem., 4, 363 378. Michel, J., Borgamano, J. and Reijmer, J.J.G. 2018 Heterozoan carbonates When, where and why A synthesis on parameters controlling carbonate production and occurrences. Earth-Sci. Rev., 182, 50 67. Moreira, J.L.P., Madeira, C.V., Gil, J.A. and Machado, M.A.P. 2007 Bacia de Santos. Boletin Geociencias. Petrobras., 15, 531 549. 71 Muniz, M. and Bosence, D.W.J. 2015 Pre-Salt microbialites from the Campos basin offshore Brazil image log facies model and cyclicity in lacustrine carbonates. In Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production Eds Bosence, D.W.J., Gibbons, K.A., Le Heron, D., Morgan, W.A., Pritchard, T. Vining, B.A. , Geological Society, London, Spec. Publ., 418, 221 242. Obermaier, M., Amthor, J., Barnett, A.J., Manzo, E. and Adams, E. 2019 87Sr 86Sr Isotope Ratios as a Tool for Stratigraphic Correlations in Pre-Salt Carbonates, Santos Basin, Offshore Brazil. AAPG Search and Discovery Article 90350. Ojiambo, S.B., Lyons, W.B., Welch, K.A., Poreda, R.J. and Johannesson, K.H. 2003 Strontium isotopes and rare earth elements as tracers of groundwater lake water interactions, Lake Naivasha, Kenya. Appl. Geochem., 18, 1789 1805. Owen, R.B., Renaut, R.W. and Lowenstein, T.K. 2018 Spatial and temporal geochemical variability in lacustrine sedimentation in the East African Rift System Evidence from the Kenya Rift and regional analyses. Sedimentology, 65, 1697 1730. Owen, R.B., Renaut, R.W., Muiruri, V.M., Rabideaux, N.M., Lowenstein, T.K., McNultye, E.P., Leete, K., Deocampof, D., Luog, S., Deinoh, A.L., Coheni, A., Sierjk, M.J., Campisanol, C., Shenmn, C.-C., Billingsleyi, A., Mbuthiao, A. and Stockheckep, M. 2019 Quaternary history of the Lake Magadi Basin, southern Kenya Rift Tectonic and climatic controls. Palaeogeogr., Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol., 518, 97 118. Pace, A., Bourillo, B.R., Vennin, E., Visscher, P.T., Dupraz, C., Thomazo, C., Sansjofre, P., Yokoyama, Y., Franceschi, M., Anguy, Y., Pigot, L., Virgone, A. and Visscher, P.T. 2016 Microbial and diagenetic steps leading to the mineralisation of Great Salt Lake microbialites. Sci. Rep., 6, 31495. Pecoraino, G., D Alessandro, W. and Inguaggiato, S. 2015 The other side of the coin geochemistry of alkaline lakes in volcanic areas. In Volcanic Lakes Eds Rouwet, D., Christenson, B., Tassi, F. and Vandemeulebrouck, J. , pp. 219 237. Berlin, Heidelberg Springer-Verlag. Pe echaty, M., Pukacz, A., Apolinarska, K., Pe echata, A. and Siepak, M. 2013 The significance of Chara vegetation in the precipitation of lacustrine calcium carbonate. Sedimentology, 60, 1017 1035. Perri, E., Tucker, M.E., S owakiewicz, M., Whitaker, F., Bowen, L. and Perrotta, I.D. 2018 Carbonate and silicate biomineralization in a hypersaline microbial mat Mesaieed sabkha, Qatar Roles of bacteria, extracellular polymeric substances and viruses. Sedimentology, 65, 1213 1245. Petersohn, E. and Abelha, M. 2013 Brasil pre-salt, Libra, geological assessment. ANP, Brazil. http www.brasilrounds.gov.br arquivos SeminariosP1 Apresentacoes pa rtilha1tecnicoambientalingles.pdf Pietzsch, R., Oliveira, D.M., Tedeschi, L.R., Neto, J.V.Q., Figueiredo, M.F., Vazquez, J.C. and de Souza, R.S. 2018 Palaeohydrology of the Lower Cretaceous presalt lacustrine system, from rift to post-rift phase, Santos Basin, Brazil. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol., 507, 60 80. Pietzsch, R., Tedeschi, L.R., Oliveira, D.M., Dias dos Anjosa, C.M., Vazqueza, J.C. and Figueiredo, M.F. 2020 Environmental conditions of deposition of the Lower 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 72 V. P. Wright Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin Brazil , based on stable carbon and oxygen isotopes a continental record of pCO2 during the onset of the Oceanic Anoxic Event 1a OAE 1a interval Chem. Geol., 535, 119457. Pindell, J., Graham, R. and Horn, B. 2014 Rapid outer marginal collapse at the rift to drift transition of passive margin evolution, with a Gulf of Mexico case study. Basin Res., 26, 701 725. Pindell, J., Graham, R. and Horn, B. 2018 Role of outer marginal collapse on salt deposition in the eastern Gulf of Mexico, Campos and Santos basins. In Passive Margins Tectonics, Sedimentation and Magmatism Eds McClay, K.R. and Hammerstein, J.A. , Geological Society, London, Spec. Publ., 476, 317 331. Pinto, V.H.G., Manatschal, G., Karpoff, A.M., Ulrich, M. and Viana, A.R. 2017 Seawater storage and element transfer associated with mantle serpentinization in magma-poor rifted margins A quantitative approach. Earth Planet Sci. Lett., 459, 227 237. Platt, N.H. and Wright, V.P. 1991 Lacustrine carbonates facies models, facies distributions and hydrocarbon aspects. Internat. Assoc. Sedimentol. Spec. Publ., 13, 57 74. Pohl, A., Donnadieu, Y., Godderis, Y., Lanteaume, C., Hairabian, A., Frau, C., Michel, J., Laugie, M., Reijmer, J.J.G., Scotese, C.R. and Borgomano, J. 2020 Carbonate platform production during the Cretaceous. GSA Bulletin, 132, 2606 2610. Polck, M.A.D.R., Gallo, V., de Figueiredo, F.J., Viana, S.M., dos Santos, V.S.S., de Queiroz Neto, J.V. and Jahnert, R.J. 2020 Ellimma longipectoralis sp. nov. Teleostei Clupeomorpha Ellimmichthyiformes from the Aptian of the Santos Basin, southeastern Brazil. J South. Am. Earth Sci., 98, 102318. Pomar, L. and Hallock, P. 2008 Carbonate factories a conundrum in sedimentary geology. Earth-Sci. Rev., 87, 134 169. Pomar, L. 2020 Carbonate Systems. In Regional Geology and Tectonics. Vol. 1 Principles of Geologic Analysis Eds Scarselli, N., Adam, J., Chiarella, D., Roberts, D.G. and Bally, A.W. , pp. 235 311. Amsterdam, Netherlands Elsevier. Rainey, D. and Jones, B. 2009 Abiotic v. biotic controls on the development of the Fairmont Hot Springs carbonate deposit, British Columbia, Canada. Sedimentology, 56, 1832 1857. Renaut, R.W. 2003 Magadiite. In Encyclopedia of Sediments and Sedimentary Rocks Eds Middleton, G.V., Church, M.J., Coniglio, M., Hardie, L.A. and Longstaffe, F.J. , pp. 417 418. Dordrecht, Netherlands Kluwer. Renaut, R.W. and Gierlowski-Kordesch, E.H. 2010 Lakes. In Facies Models 4 Eds James, N.P. and Dalrymple, R.W. , Geol Assoc Canada, 541 575. Canada St Johns. Reston, T.J. 2009 The extension discrepancy and syn-rift subsidence deficit at rifted margins. Petrol. Geosci., 15, 217 237. Reston, T.J. 2010 The opening of the central segment of the South Atlantic symmetry and the extension discrepancy. Petrol. Geosci., 16, 199 206. Richter, D.K., Neuser, R.D., Schreuer, J., Gies, H. and Immenhauser, A. 2011 Radiaxial-fibrous calcites A new look at an old problem. Sedim. Geol., 239, 23 36. Rogerson, M., Mercedes-Mart n, R., Brasier, A.T., McGill, R.A., Prior, T.J., Vonhof, H., Fellows, S.M., Reijmer, J.J.G., McClymont, E., Billing, I., Anna, M. and Pedley, M. 2017 Are spherulitic lacustrine carbonates an expression of large-scale mineral carbonation A case study from the East Kirkton. Mar. Pet. Geol., 86, 168 191. Sabato Ceraldi, T. and Green, D. 2017 Evolution of the South Atlantic lacustrine deposits in response to Early Cretaceous rifting, subsidence and lake hydrology. In Petroleum geoscience of the West Africa Margin Eds Sabato Ceraldi, T., Hodgkinson, R.A. and Backe, G. , Geological Society, London, Spec. Publ., 438, 77 98. Saller, A., Rushton, S., Buambua, L., Inman, K., McNeil, R. and Dickson, J.A.D. 2016 Presalt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola. AAPG Bull., 100, 1135 1164. Schlager, W. 2003 Benthic carbonate factories of the Phanerozoic. Int. J. Earth Sci., 92, 445 464. Santos, E.V., Cerqueira, J.R. and Prinzhofer, A. 2012 Origin of CO2 in Brazilian Basins. AAPG Search and Discovery Article 40969. Shiraishi, F., Eno, Y., Nakamura, Y., Hanzawa, Y., Asada, J. and Bahniuk, A.M. 2019 Relative influence of biotic and abiotic processes on travertine fabrics, Satono-yu hot spring, Japan. Sedimentology, 66, 459 479. Souza, R.S., Arienti, L.M., Viana, S.M., Falcao, L.C., Cuglieri, M.A., Silva, R.P., Leite, C.O., Oliveira, V.C., Oliveira, D.M., Anjos, C., Amora, R., Carmo, I.D. and Coelho, C.E. 2018 Petrology of the hydrothermal and evaporitic continental Cretaceous Aptian presalt carbonates and associated rocks, South Atlantic Santos basin, offshore Brazil. AAPG Search and Discovery Article 90323. Strozyk, F., Back, S. and Kukla, P.A. 2017 Comparison of the rift and post-rift architecture of conjugated salt and salt-free basins offshore Brazil and Angola Namibia, South Atlantic. Tectonophysics, 716, 204 224. Szatmari, P. and Milani, E.J. 2016 Tectonic control of the oil-rich large igneous-carbonate -salt province of the South Atlantic rift. Mar. Pet. Geol., 77, 567 596. Talbot, M.R. 1990 A review of the palaeohydrological interpretation of carbon and oxygen isotopic ratios in primary lacustrine carbonates. Chem. Geol., 80, 261 279. Tanaka, A.P., Faria, D.L.P., Gomes, J.P.B. and Souza, O.G. 2018 Geological characterization and modeling of an Aptian carbonate reservoir in the Santos basin, Brazil. AAPG Search and Discovery Article 11128. Teboul, P.-A., Kluska, J.M., Marty, N.C.M., Debure, M., Durlet, C., Virgone, A. and Gaucher, E.C. 2017 Volcanic rock alterations of the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola insights from an integrated petrological, geochemical and numerical approach. Mar. Pet.Geol., 80, 394 411. Tedeschi, L.R., Jenkyns, H.C., Robinson, S.A., Sanjin es, A.E.S., Viviers, M.C., Quintaes, C.M.S.P. and Vazquez, C.J. 2017 New age constraints on Aptian evaporites and carbonates from South Atlantic implications for Oceanic Anoxic Event 1a. Geology, 45, 543 546. Terra, G.J.S., Spadini, A.R., Franc a, A.B., Sombra, C.L., Zambonato, E.E., Juschaks, L.C., Arienti, L.M. and Erthal, M.M. 2010 Carbonate rock classification applied to Brazilian sedimentary basins. Boletin Geociencias. Petrobras., 18, 9 29. Tosca, N.J. and Wright, V.P. 2015 Diagenetic pathways linked to labile Mg clays in lacustrine carbonate reservoirs a model for the origin of secondary porosity in the Cretaceous pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, offshore Brazil. In Reservoir quality of clastic and carbonate rocks 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73 Aptian chemogenic lacustrine factory analysis, modelling and prediction Eds Armitage, P.J., Butcher, A.R., Churchill, J.M., Csoma, A.E., Hollis, C., Lander, R.H., Omma, J.E. Worden, R.H. , Geological Society, London, Spec. Publ, 435, 33 46. Tosca, N.J., Tutolo, B., Wood, R.A. and Huwald, N. 2018 Chemical Constraints on carbonate sedimentation and fabric development, Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazil. AAPG Search and Discovery Article 90323. Tutolo, B. and Tosca, N.J. 2018 Experimental examination of Mg-silicate carbonate system at ambient temperature implications for alkaline chemical sedimentation and lacustrine carbonate formation. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 225, 80 101. Tritlla, J., Esteban, M., Loma, R., Mattos, A. and Sanchez, V. 2018 Carbonates that are no more Silicified Pre-Salt Oil Reservoirs in Campos Basin Brazil . AAPG Search and Discovery Article 90323. Vieira de Luc, P.H., Matias, H., Carbalo, J., Sineva, D., Pimentel, G.A., Tritlla, J., Esteban, M., Loma, R., Alonso, J.L.A., Jim enez, R.P., Pontet, M., Martinez, P.B. and Vega, V. 2017 Breaking barriers and paradigms in Pre-Salt car discovery, offshore exploration the P ao de Ac u Brazil . AAPG Memoir, 113, 177 194. Winter, R.W., Jahnert, R.J. and Franca, A.B. 2007 Bacia de Campos. Boletin Geociencias. Petrobras., 15, 511 529. Wright, V.P. 2012 Lacustrine carbonates in rift settings the interaction of volcanic and microbial processes on carbonate deposition. In Advances in carbonate exploration and reservoir analysis Eds Garland, J., Neilson, J.E., Laubach, S.E. and Whidden, K.J. , Geological Society, London, Spec. Publ., 370, 39 47. Wright, V.P. and Barnett, A.J. 2015 An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic early cretaceous lacustrine carbonates. In Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production Eds Bosence, D.W.J., Gibbons, K.A., Le 73 Heron, D.P., Morgan, W.A., Pritchard, T. and Vining, B.A. , Geological Society, London, Spec. Publ., 418, 209 219. Wright, V.P. and Barnett, A.J. 2017 Critically evaluating the current depositional models for the pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, Offshore Brazil. AAPG Search and Discovery, Article 51439. Wright, V.P. and Barnett, A.J. 2020 The textural evolution and ghost matrices of the Cretaceous Barra Velha Formation carbonates from the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. Facies, 66, 7. Wright, V.P. and Rodriguez, K. 2018 Reinterpreting the South Atlantic Pre-Salt Microbialite reservoirs petrographic, isotopic and seismic evidence for a shallow evaporitic lake depositional model. First Break, 36, 71 77. Wright, V.P. and Tosca, N.J. 2016 A geochemical model for the formation of the pre-salt reservoirs, Santos Basin, Brazil implications for understanding reservoir distribution. AAPG Search and Discovery, Article 51304. Zal an, P.V., Severino, M.C.G., Rigoti, C., Magnavita, L.P., Oliveira, J.A.B. and Viana, A.R. 2011 An Entirely New 3D-View of the Crustal and Mantle Structure of a South Atlantic Passive Margin Santos, Campos and Esp rito Santo Basins, Brazil. AAPG Search and Discovery Article 30177. Zeyen, N., Daval, D., Lopez-Garciac, P., Moreirac, D., Gaillardet, J. and Benzerara, K. 2017 Geochemical conditions allowing the formation of modern lacustrine microbialites. Proc. Earth Planet. Sci., 17, 380 383. Zhuravlev, A.Y. and Wood, R.A. 2009 Controls on carbonate skeletal mineralogy Global CO2 evolution and mass extinctions. Geology, 37, 1123 1126. Manuscript received 3 September 2020 revision 18 November 2020 revision accepted 25 November 2020 2020 The Authors. Sedimentology 2020 International Association of Sedimentologists, Sedimentology, 69, 47 73

[END_OF_PAPER]

Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 201 2021 108441 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering journal homepage http www.elsevier.com locate petrol Seismic pattern classification integrated with permeability-porosity evaluation for reservoir characterization of presalt carbonates in the Buzios Field, Brazil Danilo Jotta Ariza Ferreira a, b, , Raquel Macedo Dias a, Wagner Moreira Lupinacci a a Exploratory Interpretation and Reservoir Characterization Group GIECAR - Department of Geology and Geophysics, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Nitero i, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Schlumberger Servicos de Petroleo Ltda, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil b A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T Keywords Unsupervised facies classification Seismic attributes Reservoir characterization Presalt carbonates This paper presents the application of an unsupervised neural network to classification of seismic facies based on a unique combination of stratigraphic and structural seismic attributes. This classification was integrated with statistical analysis of the porosity and permeability of the seismic facies which permitted the advanced reservoir characterization of the presalt carbonate reservoirs of the Barra Velha Formation in the Buzios Field, Santos Basin. This advanced approach is required due to the high degree of heterogeneity and complexity these res ervoirs, which directly impacts on their porosity and permeability. Preconditioning of the seismic data was essential for filtering random and structurally oriented noise prior to the generation of seismic attributes. Four seismic attributes acoustic impedance, rms amplitude, local flatness and principal dip component, were selected as the inputs for the unsupervised classification based on their capacity for differentiating between the observed seismic patterns within the Barra Velha Formation. Principal component analysis was then performed to decrease redundancy of the input seismic attribute data prior to classification. The analysis of amplitude seismic features as well as of the classification results allowed the identification of three different seismic patterns within the study area build-ups, debris and aggradational progradational carbonate platforms. The seismic attribute of principal dip component proved to be crucial for distinguishing between carbonate build-ups and debris seismic facies. Our results demonstrated that the build-up and debris seismic facies are commonly occur aligned with faults, display higher porosity and permeability and as such they are inferred to be the best reservoirs. 1. Introduction In recent years, the presalt carbonates from marginal Brazilian basins have gained worldwide recognition due their importance as the prin cipal reservoirs of a number of giant fields. As of August 2020, these reservoirs were producing 2.2Mbo day which represents 98 of the production from the Santos Basin, the most prolific Brazilian oil and gas basin ANP, 2020 . The Barra Velha Formation represents the uppermost section of the presalt carbonates within the Santos Basin and was deposited within an alkaline-lacustrine paleoenvironment during the late rift and sag phases of the Aptian Moreira et al., 2007 Wright and Barnett, 2015 . Car bonate precipitation occurred mainly controlled by chemical processes Wright, 2012 Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2017 Wright and Tosca, 2016 and rift faults, that acted as paths for hydrothermal vents, as well as meteoric water, that lixiviated the surrounding basaltic terrains, both fed the lacustrine waters with alkalis and CO2 Szatmari and Milani, 2016 . The Barra Velha Formation Fm. is typically composed of varying proportions of different sediments shrubs, spherulites, carbonate muds and Mg-rich clays. Lithotype classification varies depending on the origin and composition of the component sediments but lithotypes can be divided into three main groups mudstones, in situ carbonates and reworked carbonates Terra et al., 2010 Pereira et al., 2013 Rezende and Pope, 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2015 Farias et al., 2019 Gomes et al., 2020 . In situ carbonate rocks represent the proximal lacustrine Corresponding author. Exploratory Interpretation and Reservoir Characterization Group GIECAR - Department of Geology and Geophysics, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Nitero i, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. E-mail addresses daniloariza id.uff.br D.J. Ariza Ferreira , raquelmacedo id.uff.br R.M. Dias , wagnerlupinacci id.uff.br W.M. Lupinacci . https doi.org 10.1016 j.petrol.2021.108441 Received 10 August 2020 Received in revised form 12 January 2021 Accepted 19 January 2021 Available online 11 February 2021 0920-4105 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. D.J. Ariza Ferreira et al. Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 201 2021 108441 Fig. 1. Location of the buzios field within the santos basin. facies and are represented by shrubby carbonates, spherulitic carbonates and laminites which may all be reworked into grainstones. Mudstones represent the distal deep water facies of the Barra Velha Formation. It should also be highlighted that volcanic rocks occur in places interca lated with these lacustrine lithologies Fornero et al., 2019 Penna and Lupinacci, 2020 . The seismic patterns associated with the lacustrine carbonates of the Barra Velha Fm. are 1 carbonate platforms on structural highs with parallel to sub-parallel reflectors 2 carbonate build-ups with convexup concordant internal reflections either along the footwalls of normal faults or on isolated highs, 3 debris or reworked seismic facies on the hanging wall side of normal faults characterized by clinoform geome tries and 4 deep lake facies within the structural lows with weak parallel to sub-parallel or absent reflectors Buckley et al., 2015 Kattah and Balabekov, 2015 Saller et al., 2016 Ferreira et al., 2019a, 2019b Jesus et al., 2019 Neves et al., 2019 Zala n et al., 2019 . Due to the complex depositional history and compositional hetero geneity of the Barra Velha Fm, advanced techniques are required for reservoir characterization combined with robust analysis and interpre tation sustained by an in-depth understanding of conceptual deposi tional models Johann et al., 2012 Johann, 2013 Bruhn et al., 2017 . An effective and promising advanced technique for the characterization of seismic facies within presalt carbonate reservoirs is unsupervised classification by a multi-attribute neural network. Johann et al. 2012 proposed a methodology based on self-organized maps with the use of seismic attributes as inputs for the unsupervised classification of seismic facies in a presalt reservoir area. Their results indicated a good corre lation between the best classified facies and well placement. Jesus et al. 2019 also adopted a similar approach through the use of a neural network to undertake unsupervised seismic classification which resulted in the effective mapping of individual geobodies representing the carbonate mounds within a presalt field. These authors also employed a self-organizing maps methodology with the inputs being the seismic attributes of coherence, curvature and hybrid spectral decom position within the Barra Velha Formation interval. Ferreira et al. 2019a used a k-means clustering approach with envelope and acoustic impedance as stratigraphic attributes and high resolution eigen coher ence as a structural attribute for unsupervised seismic facies classifica tion in a presalt field located on the Outer high of the Santos Basin. Their results allowed the differentiation and mapping of aggradational progradational carbonate platforms, carbonate build-ups and debris seismic patterns throughout the study area. The carbonate build-up seismic facies were inferred as having the highest porosity and perme ability with well information. 2 D.J. Ariza Ferreira et al. Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 201 2021 108441 Fig. 2. Map view of the base of salt interpreted seismic horizon depth contours across the Buzios Field black polygon with the coverage of the 3D Seismic data shown by the green rectangle and well locations shown by black circles. The red lines show the location of the arbitrary seismic lines AB1 and AB2 presented in this study. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. The Buzios Field is a giant oil field operated by Petrobras is the second largest Brazilian oil field and is located within the Santos Basin Fig. 1 . This field accounts for 26 of the total production from the Santos Basin, with total estimated oil reserves of approximately 30 Bbo ANP, 2016, 2020 . Castro and Lupinacci 2019 performed a petro physical evaluation of reservoirs within the Barra Velha Fm. and the Itapema Fm encountered within a well drilled in the Buzios Field. They highlighted the presence of fine grains intercalated with carbonate rocks that have a negative impact on reservoir quality. They proposed a di vision of the Barra Velha Formation sag phase into a lower and upper sag with the lower section being characterized by a greater stevensite clay content. They established that the mean effective porosity for the Barra Velha Fm. was around 8 in the studied area. Dias et al. 2019 performed an acoustic inversion of both the Barra Velha and Itapema Formations across the Buzios Field aiming to infer the relationship between acoustic impedance and porosity. They iden tified, a strong correlation between these two properties for the Barra Velha Formation, however two main trends were observed. One for the upper sag and upper rift sections, and another for the lower sag section, due to the presence of stevensite clays in the lower interval. Ferreira et al. 2019a proposed a multi-attribute, unsupervised neural network classification of the Barra Velha Formation interval within the Buzios Field. They were able to individualize carbonate build-ups and aggradational progradational carbonate platform seismic patterns. However, the debris facies could not be discriminated from the other seismic facies using the selected seismic attributes. In this paper, we propose the use of an unsupervised artificial neural network algorithm to perform seismic facies classification based on a unique combination of stratigraphic and structural seismic attributes. This classification is then integrated with porosity and permeability logs from the Barra Velha Fm. to improve the efficiency of reservoir char acterization within the Buzios Field. By doing so, we aimed to effectively identify and individualize three seismic patterns build-ups, carbonate platforms and debris and also assess their reservoir potential without 3 D.J. Ariza Ferreira et al. Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 201 2021 108441 Fig. 4. Preconditioning to remove random and structurally oriented noise ef fects. a Original seismic data b Preconditioned seismic data. signal-to-noise ratio Fig. 4 . Carbonate build-ups, debris and aggradational progradational car bonate platforms are the principal seismic patterns identified within the Barra Velha Fm. in the study area. Their characteristics were analyzed in the original seismic volume to build a conceptual geological model which was used to guide later interpretation of the seismic facies ob tained by the unsupervised neural network classification Fig. 5 . We analyzed the response of several seismic attributes as extracted from the preconditioned seismic data based on amplitude, phase and frequency or a combination of these components to identify strati graphic and structural characteristics that could be used to differentiate and map the seismic patterns in the study area, as proposed by Ferreira et al. 2019a and Jesus et al. 2019 . We chose two stratigraphic seismic attributes and two structural seismic attributes as inputs for the unsupervised classification Fig. 3. Simplified methodology flowchart. the need for geostatistical modeling. 2. Method The data available for this study consists of 770 km2 of 3D post-stack depth migrated seismic PSDM and porosity and permeability well logs from 15 wells within the Buzios Field. We mapped the base of salt upper Aptian age and the Pre-Alagoas lower Aptian age unconformities that represent, respectively, the top and bottom of the Barra Velha Fm. interval. The main faults were also mapped across the study area. Fig. 2 shows the data coverage across the study area including well location, depth contours of the base of salt unconformity and the location of the seismic sections are presented in this study. Our methodology can be divided into two stages 1 identification of the principal seismic patterns and selection of the seismic attributes to be used as input for the 2 neural network unsupervised seismic facies classification and integration with permeability-porosity evaluation. A simplified methodology flowchart is presented in Fig. 3. Acoustic impedance stratigraphic attribute, which usually correlates well with lithological signatures and was obtained using the inver sion algorithm proposed by Russell and Hampson 1991, 2006 and Barclay et al. 2008 Rms amplitude stratigraphic attribute, extracted using the method proposed by Taner et al. 1979 and which is sensitive to abrupt changes in acoustic impedance Local flatness structural attribute that maps the flatness of reflectors, that are not necessarily horizontal, thus revealing vertical anomalies Randen and S nneland, 2005 Pereira, 2009 Principal dip component structural attribute Randen et al., 2000 that calculates the principal eigenvector normal to the local dip, thus revealing a smoothed dip gradient of reflectors. 2.1. Identification of the principal seismic patterns and selection of seismic attributes The stratigraphic and structural characteristics highlighted by the seismic attributes for each of the identified seismic patterns is shown n Fig. 5. The expression of these attributes along an individual seismic trace extracted along the trajectory of the ANP-1 well, is shown in Fig. 6. Carbonate build-ups are characterized by domical shaped reflectors and chaotic internal reflectors with high local flatness values high lighting internal discontinuities. The carbonate build-ups present low to intermediate rms amplitude values related to the intercalation of a few high amplitude internal reflectors. This corroborates with acoustic impedance which usually presents low to intermediate values for this Prior to the identification of the main seismic patterns and selection of the seismic attributes to be used as inputs for the neural network classification, preconditioning of the seismic data was undertaken. This was achieved through the use of a structural smoothing filter Hale, 2009 to reduce the influence of structurally oriented noise followed by a median filter Huang et al., 1979 to reduce random noise. The resulting combination of these two filters was effective for partial removal of both oriented and random noise thus increasing the 4 D.J. Ariza Ferreira et al. Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 201 2021 108441 Fig. 5. Principal seismic patterns identified within the Barra Velha Fm. interval - Typical seismic amplitude for a carbonate build-ups IL4710 , b debris and c aggradational progradational carbonate platforms as observed within IL4710, XL3804 and IL4186 respectively. Note IL - Inline, XL - crossline. Selected seismic attributes for the same seismic patterns local flatness in d , e f rms amplitude in g , h i principal dip component in j , k l , and acoustic impedance in m n o . seismic pattern. The principal dip component shows a variation between high and low dips, probably related to internal chaoticity. The debris seismic pattern displays a clinoformal shape in the seismic amplitude volume and can often display chaotic internal reflectors. This pattern is characterized by high local flatness values whilst the values for and rms amplitude and acoustic impedance are low, indicating only minor intercalation of lithologies. Intermediate to high values are obtained for the principal dip component attribute as expected for a dipping seismic pattern which occurs in faulted areas. In the seismic amplitude volume, the aggradational progradational carbonate platforms are characterized by an intercalation of parallel to sub-parallel reflectors with onlap and downlap truncation where pro gradations occur. Low local flatness values indicate good reflector continuity. Both the rms amplitude and acoustic impedance attributes 5 D.J. Ariza Ferreira et al. Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 201 2021 108441 Fig. 6. Seismic trace expression for each of the selected attributes used as input for the unsupervised neural network seismic facies classification. The seismic trace was extracted along the ANP-1 well trajectory within the Barra Velha Fm. interval. From left to right, preconditioned seismic trace, local flatness, rms amplitude, principal dip component and acoustic impedance. display an intercalation of high and low values, suggesting a reasonable degree of lithological variation. The principal dip component attribute shows very low values across carbonate platforms corroborating with the horizontal continuity observed in the seismic amplitude volume. 2.2. Unsupervised neural network seismic facies classification integrated with permeability-porosity evaluation Fig. 7. Preconditioned seismic section a from the 3D seismic volume along arbitrary line 1 AB1 with the values of b the local flatness attribute c the rms amplitude attribute d the principal dip component e , the acoustic impedance attribute for the Barra Velha Formation f results of the seismic facies classi fication of the Barra Velha Fm overlain on the filtered seismic data. Well paths are shown by the yellow or white lines and faults by the black lines. As can be noted, build-ups are mostly concentrated on the footwall side of normal faults and are laterally associated with the debris seismic facies which tend to occur on the hanging wall side of faults. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. The neural network technique was first developed by McCulloch and Pitts 1943 , based on the dynamics of brain learning process where the input of external stimulus activates a specific groups of neurons based on their affinity to that type of stimulus. As defined by Du and Swamy 2014 , the output of each neuron in given by the following equation J1 y wi xi , i 1 volumes given as inputs and best represents the seismic attribute pat terns. The first principal component is then subtracted from the original sample space and another principal component is extracted from the residual sample space. This process continues until the number of principal components generated from the sample space is equal to the dimensions of the original sample space. For our work we used all four principal component volumes generated from the selected seismic at tributes sample space as inputs for the unsupervised neural network. A multi-layered perceptron network with lateral connections for inhibition architecture and competitive learning method Russell and Norvig, 2010 Du and Swamy, 2014 was used in this study to where y is the output of a neuron, wi is the link weight from the xi input, is a threshold or bias, J1 is the total number of inputs and . is the activation function that is usually a continuous or discontinuous func tion between the interval of 1,1 or 0,1 . Prior to the unsupervised classification, a principal component analysis was performed using the seismic attribute volumes as input. This linear transformation aims to create principal component volumes or major variance direction volumes to be used as inputs in the neural network, therefore reducing redundancy Hotelling, 1933 Zhao et al., 2015 . As defined by Zhao et al. 2015 , the first principal component is extracted from the sample space composed of the seismic attribute 6 D.J. Ariza Ferreira et al. Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 201 2021 108441 Fig. 8. Preconditioned seismic section a from the 3D seismic volume along arbitrary line 2 AB1 with seismic attributes shown for the Barra Velha Forma tion interval b local flatness attribute c rms amplitude attribute d principal dip component attribute e acoustic impedance attribute and f the results of the seismic facies classification for the same interval. Faults are shown by black lines and well paths by the yellow or white lines. It should be noted that the aggradational progradational carbonate platforms are the dominant seismic facies in stable areas of structural highs away from their faulted margins. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. discriminate between the five different seismic facies. Competitive learning is based on the clustering principle, where input data is sub divided into a number of user defined clusters according to data simi larity identified by the algorithm. We defined the ideal number of facies as 7 after a series of trial and error attempts with 3 10 facies. The seismic facies classification volume was analyzed for greater geological understanding and the classified facies were then manually grouped into 3 classes build-up, debris and aggradational prograda tional carbonate platforms in accordance with the seismic patterns identified in amplitude seismic data. The ideal number of facies and grouped facies classes was chosen based on the capacity of these two steps to differentiate between facies and map the different seismic pat terns identified by stratigraphic analysis of the original seismic data. The unsupervised classification volume was then used to build probability of occurrence and zonation maps for the seismic patterns in the study area. These maps allowed the identification and delimitation of the most likely occurrences of each of the classified facies within the Barra Velha Fm. interval. Total porosity and permeability histograms and cross-plots were generated for each of the seismic facies based on the available well log information to qualitatively evaluate their reser voir potential within the Buzios Field. 3. Results and discussions The evaluation of the identified seismic patterns and the results of the seismic facies classification are presented as seismic sections in Figs. 7 and 8, in map view projected over the base of salt unconformity in Fig. 9 and as a sliced 3D view in Fig. 10. Aggradational progradational carbonate platforms are the dominant seismic facies across the Buzios Field, in particular on structural highs away from faulted areas, within local structural lows and in the deeper portions of the study area. As expected, these seismic facies display high local flatness values related to subhorizontal reflectors and the inter calation of contrasting reflectors as evident in both the rms amplitude and acoustic impedance. These characteristics and associated seismic attributes were essential for the delimitation of this seismic facies by the 7 D.J. Ariza Ferreira et al. Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 201 2021 108441 lows and in the deeper parts of the Barra Velha Formation. Build-up seismic facies are less abundant in the study area and often occur as N S aligned features subparallel to the main direction of faulting. The carbonate build-ups are either located near faulted areas on the main structural highs or at local highs isolated by faulting within the deeper portions of the Barra Velha interval. These seismic facies display chaotic internal reflectors in original amplitude data and as such is associated with lower flatness higher local flatness attribute values . Reflectors within these facies either display dips of greater than 80 or less than 45 . The carbonate build-ups consistently display intermediate to high impedance values and no response for the rms amplitude signal characteristics which were important for their discrimination. A pre dominance of shrubby and spherulitic carbonates can also be inferred for these seismic facies related to hydrothermal activity as suggested by Wright 2012 , Wright and Barnett 2015 and Zala n et al. 2019 . The debris seismic facies are generally laterally associated with carbonate build-ups and as such they also occur as N S aligned features but on the hanging wall side of normal faults. The use of the principal dip component seismic attribute as input for unsupervised classification was essential for the differentiation of this seismic facies from the car bonate build-ups. The debris seismic facies display consistently inter mediate to high dip values even where they presented similar values to the carbonate build-ups for the other seismic attributes. We infer that the debris seismic facies consist of reworked sediments in the form of grainstones with clasts sourced from the insitu carbonates. It is impor tant to mention that since both the build-ups and the debris seismic facies are associated with chaotic seismic signals, their unsupervised classification results are often intertwined in some places or can be mistaken with noise in poorly illuminated areas. As such their occur rence may have been overestimated in the seismic volume that covers part of the Buzios Field. Fig. 11 presents average proportion maps for each seismic facies as well as a zonation map of the study area that was created from these probability maps and which displays the most probable seismic facies within the Barra Velha Fm. interval. The zonation map Fig. 11d in dicates that the majority of the wells were drilled in places where either aggradational progradational carbonate platforms or carbonate buildups are the dominant seismic facies. There is a greater occurrence of the debris and carbonates build-ups seismic facies in the western portion of the study area. An evaluation of the reservoir potential of each of the seismic facies was done, we performed it by comparing available porosity and permeability log data with the mapped seismic facies for each well lo cations. A log view for five wells is illustrated in Fig. 12 with an apparent trend of decreasing porosity and permeability towards the top of the Barra Velha Fm. However, due to the high heterogeneity of the forma tion it is difficult to observe any direct and marked correlation between the mapped seismic facies and petrophysical properties. Therefore, for a more statistical evaluation, porosity and permeability histograms were constructed for each seismic facies as well as cross-plots between those properties Fig. 13 . Mean porosity is intermediate for all the seismic facies ranging from 0.10 to 0.12 whilst mean permeability is considerably high ranging from 156 to 704 mD. The correlation between these two petrophysical properties varies from 0.83 to 0.86 for all the seismic facies and they can all be considered good reservoirs. Permeability and porosity are higher for both the carbonate build-ups and the debris seismic facies thus we can infer that these seismic facies are the best reservoirs within the Buzios Field. However, it is important to note that the standard Fig. 9. The results of the seismic facies classification presented in map view over the base of the salt unconformity top of the Barra Velha Fm. shown. Well locations are represented by the white circles and the black polygon shows the limits of Buzios field. Fig. 10. Sliced 3D view of the results of the seismic facies classification across the study area. Well paths are shown by the black lines. The build-up and debris seismic facies are more common within the western part of the Buzios field associated with major faulting. unsupervised neural network. We can infer that the carbonate platform seismic facies commonly contain intercalations of different lithologies likely to be represented by low scale shrubby carbonates, spherulitic carbonates and laminites. It is expected that the shrubby and spherulitic carbonates would be more common on the structural highs, with laminites within local structural 8 D.J. Ariza Ferreira et al. Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 201 2021 108441 Fig. 11. Seismic facies proportion maps within the Barra Velha Fm. interval for a build-ups, b aggradational progradational carbonate platforms, c debris seismic facies and d a zonation map created from these proportion maps for the Buzios Field. deviation in permeability is greater for these two seismic facies. Therefore, the carbonate build-ups and debris facies have greater het erogeneity leading to a possible reduction in reservoir quality in places. Finally, it is also important to highlight that these conclusions are based on information from wells drilled at structural highs, therefore caution should be used when using this well data to evaluate reservoir quality across the entire Buzios Field. seismic data and were classified as seismic facies by the neural network carbonate build-ups, aggradational progradational carbonate platforms and debris. Build-ups are located mainly only the footwalls of normal faults whilst the debris seismic facies occur laterally on the hanging wall side of faults. These two seismic facies are the most common in the western part of the study area. The principal dip component seismic attribute was fundamental for effectively differentiating between car bonate build-ups and the debris seismic facies during the unsupervised classification. The carbonate platforms are the dominant seismic facies across the Buzios Field and occur both on structural highs away from faulted areas and within the deeper portions of the studied interval. The carbonate build-ups and carbonate platforms are the most drilled seismic facies throughout the area but according to our statistical analysis the debris seismic facies and carbonate build-ups present the best porosity and permeability. The average porosity of these latter facies ranges from 0.11 to 0.12 and average permeability from 600 to 704 mD suggesting that carbonate build-ups and debris facies represent the best reservoirs within the Barra Velha Formation in the Buzios Field. 4. Conclusions The proposed workflow for classifying and mapping seismic facies within the Barra Velha Formation across the Buzios Field, through the use of an unsupervised neural network and integration with statistical analysis of porosity and permeability as an advanced reservoir charac terization proved to be effective. The preconditioning of seismic data for noise attenuation through filtering and the selection of stratigraphic and structural seismic attributes, produced good quality data and enough signal diversity to be effectively used as the input for the unsupervised classification. Three seismic patterns were identified in the amplitude 9 D.J. Ariza Ferreira et al. Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 201 2021 108441 Fig. 12. Comparison between the results of seismic facies classification and the total porosity and permeability logs for five wells within the Barra Velha Formation interval. The high heterogeneity of the interval makes it difficult to establish a direct correlation between the petrophysical logs and seismic facies. Nonetheless a general decrease in porosity towards the top of the Barra Velha Formation was observed in the majority of the wells. 10 D.J. Ariza Ferreira et al. Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 201 2021 108441 Fig. 13. Porosity and permeability distribution histograms and cross-plots between the two parameters for carbonate build-ups a.1 , a.2 and a.3 aggradational progradational carbonate platforms b.1 , b.2 and b.3 and for the debris seismic facies c.1 , c.2 and c.3 . The debris and build-up seismic facies display better permeability and porosity. The correlation coefficients between permeability and porosity are high for all the seismic facies. Declaration of competing interest overview and future challenges. In OTC Brasil Offshore Technology Conference. https doi.org 10.4043 28159-MS. Buckley, J.P., Bosence, D., Elders, C., 2015. Tectonic setting and stratigraphic architecture of an Early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonate platform, Sugar Loaf High. Santos Basin, Brazil Geological Society, London, Special Publications 418 1 , 175 191. https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.13. de Castro, T., Lupinacci, W., 2019. Evaluation of fine-grains in pre-salt reservoirs. In Proceedings of the 16th International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society Expogef. Brazilian Geophysical Society, pp. 1 6. https doi.org 10.22564 16cisbgf2019.299. Dias, R.M., Castro, T.M., Santos, M.A.C., Lupinacci, W.M., 2019. Understanding the relationship between acoustic impedance and porosity in the presalt of the Buzios Field, Santos Basin. In First EAGE Workshop on Pre-salt Reservoir from Exploration to Production. European Association of Geoscientists Engineers, pp. 1 5. https doi.org 10.3997 2214-4609.201982009. Du, K., Swamy, M.N.S., 2014. Neural Networks and Statistical Learning. Springer London, London, p. 824. https doi.org 10.1007 978-1-4471-5571-3. Farias, F., Szatmari, P., Bahniuk, A., Franc a, A.B., 2019. Evaporitic carbonates in the presalt of Santos Basin genesis and tectonic implications. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 105 November 2018 , 251 272. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2019.04.020. Ferreira, D., Lupinacci, W., de Castro, T., Casado, N., Alvarenga, M., Bezerra, Y., Junior, J., Santos, M.A., 2019a. Neural network unsupervised classification as an advanced presalt reservoir characterization technique - a Buzios Field case study. In Proceedings of the 16th International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society Expogef. Brazilian Geophysical Society, pp. 1 6. https doi.org 10.22564 16cisbgf2019.217. Ferreira, D.J.A., Lupinacci, W.M., Neves, I. de A., Zambrini, J.P.R., Ferrari, A.L., Gamboa, L.A.P., Olho Azul, M., 2019b. Unsupervised seismic facies classification applied to a presalt carbonate reservoir, Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. AAPG Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull. 103 4 , 997 1012. https doi.org 10.1306 10261818055. Fornero, S.A., Marins, G.M., Lobo, J.T., Freire, A.F.M., de Lima, E.F., 2019. Characterization of subaerial volcanic facies using acoustic image logs lithofacies and log-facies of a lava-flow deposit in the Brazilian pre-salt, deepwater of Santos Basin. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 99 6 , 156 174. https doi.org 10.1016 j. marpetgeo.2018.09.029. Gomes, J.P., Bunevich, R.B., Tedeschi, L.R., Tucker, M.E., Whitaker, F.F., 2020. Facies classification and patterns of lacustrine carbonate deposition of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazilian pre-salt. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 113, 104176. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2019.104176. September 2019. Hale, D., 2009. Structure-oriented smoothing and semblance. CWP Report 635, 261 270. Hotelling, H., 1933. Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into principal components. J. Educ. Psychol. 24 6 , 417 441. https doi.org 10.1037 h0071325. Huang, T., Yang, G., Tang, G., 1979. A fast two-dimensional median filtering algorithm. IEEE Trans. Acoust. Speech Signal Process. 27 1 , 13 18. https doi.org 10.1109 TASSP.1979.1163188. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Acknowledgements The authors thank the Brazilian Petroleum Agency ANP for providing the seismic and well data used in this research and Schlum berger, Emerson and IkonScience for providing academic environment software licenses for the development of this study. Appendix A. Supplementary data Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https doi. org 10.1016 j.petrol.2021.108441. Credit roles Danilo Jotta Ariza Ferreira Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing original draft, Writing review editing, Visualization, Raquel Macedo Dias - Methodology, Investi gation, Resources, Wagner Moreira Lupinacci - Conceptualization, Methodology, Resources, Writing original draft, Writing review editing, Supervision, Project administration. References ANP, 2020. Boletim da Produc a o de Petro leo e Ga s Natural, Rio de Janeiro, p. 37. ANP, 2016. Plano de Desenvolvimento do Campo de Buzios, Rio de Janeiro, p. 3. Barclay, F., Rasmussen, K.B., Cooke, A., Cooke, D., Salter, D., Lowden, D., Pickering, S., Rasmussen, A., Roberts, R., 2008. Seismic Inversion Reading between the Lines Oilfield Review, pp. 42 63. Bruhn, C.H.L., Pinto, A.C.C., Johann, P.R.S., Branco, C.C.M., Saloma o, M.C., Freire, E.B., 2017. Campos and Santos basins 40 Years of reservoir characterization and management of shallow- to ultra-deep water, post- and pre-salt reservoirs - historical 11 D.J. Ariza Ferreira et al. Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 201 2021 108441 Russell, B., Hampson, D., 1991. Comparison of poststack seismic inversion methods. SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 1991. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, pp. 876 878. https doi.org 10.1190 1.1888870. Russell, B., Hampson, D., 2006. The old and the new in seismic inversion. Canadian Society of Exploration Geophysics Recorder 31 10 , 5 10. Russell, S.J., Norvig, P. Eds. , 2010. Artificial Intelligence A Modern Approach. Pearson, New Jersey, p. 1095. Saller, A., Rushton, S., Buambua, L., Inman, K., McNeil, R., Tony Dickson, J.A.D., 2016. Presalt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola. AAPG Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull. 100, 1135 1164. https doi.org 10.1306 02111615216, 07. Szatmari, P., Milani, E.J., 2016. Tectonic control of the oil-rich large igneous-carbonatesalt province of the South Atlantic rift. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 77, 567 596. https doi. org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2016.06.004. Taner, M.T., Koehler, F., Sheriff, R.E., 1979. Complex seismic trace analysis. Geophysics 44 6 , 1041 1063. https doi.org 10.1190 1.1440994. Terra, J.G.S., et al., 2010. Classificac o es cla ssicas de rochas carbona ticas. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 18 1 , 9 29. Wright, V.P., 2012. Lacustrine carbonates in rift settings the interaction of volcanic and microbial processes on carbonate deposition. Geological Society, London, Special Publications 370 1 , 39 47. https doi.org 10.1144 SP370.2. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2015. An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates. Geological Society, London, Special Publications 418 1 , 209 219. https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.3. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A., 2017. Classifying reservoir carbonates when the status quo simply does not Work a case study from the cretaceous of the south atlantic. In AAPG Annual Conference and Exhibition. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, pp. 108 121. Wright, V.P., Tosca, N., 2016. A geochemical model for the formation of the pre-salt reservoirs , Santos Basin, Brazil implications for understanding reservoir distribution. In AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, p. 32. Zala n, P., Rodriguez, K., Cvetkovic, M., 2019. Extraordinary remaining potential in the pre-salt of Santos Basin. In Proceedings of the 16th International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society Expogef. Brazilian Geophysical Society, pp. 1 8. https doi.org 10.22564 16cisbgf2019.128. Zhao, T., Jayaram, V., Roy, A., Marfurt, K.J., 2015. A comparison of classification techniques for seismic facies recognition. Interpretation 3 4 . https doi.org 10.1190 INT-2015-0044.1. SAE29 SAE58. Jesus, C., Olho Azul, M., Lupinacci, W.M., Machado, L., 2019. Multiattribute framework analysis for the identification of carbonate mounds in the Brazilian presalt zone Interpretation, 7 2 , T467 T476. https doi.org 10.1190 INT-2018-0004.1. Johann, P., 2013. Challenges in Brazilian pre-salt reservoirs geophysical characterization. https doi.org 10.3997 2214-4609.20131228. Johann, P.R., Martini, A.F., Maul, A., Nunes, J.P.P., 2012. Reservoir geophysics in Brazilian pre-salt oilfields. In Offshore Technology Conference Offshore Technology Conference, pp. 1 10. https doi.org 10.4043 23681-MS. Kattah, S., Balabekov, Y., 2015. Seismic facies geometries of the pre-salt limestone units and newly-identified exploration trends within the Santos and Campos basins, Brazil. In 14th International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society EXPOGEF. Brazilian Geophysical Society, pp. 288 293. https doi.org 10.1190 sbgf2015-057. McCulloch, W.S., Pitts, W., 1943. A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in nervous activity. Bull. Math. Biophys. 5 4 , 115 133. https doi.org 10.1007 BF02478259. Moreira, J.L.P., Madeira, C.V., Gil, J.A., Pinheiro, M.A.P., 2007. Bacia de Santos. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 15 2 , 531 549. Neves, I. de A., Lupinacci, W.M., Ferreira, D.J.A., Zambrini, J.P.R., Oliveira, L.O.A., Olho Azul, M., Ferrari, A.L., Gamboa, L.A.P., 2019. Presalt reservoirs of the Santos Basin cyclicity, electrofacies, and tectonic-sedimentary evolution interpretation, 7 4 . https doi.org 10.1190 INT-2018-0237.1. SH33 SH43. Penna, R., Lupinacci, W.M., 2020. Decameter-scale flow-unit classification in Brazilian presalt carbonates. SPE Reservoir Eval. Eng. https doi.org 10.2118 201235-PA. Pereira, L.A., 2009. Seismic Attributes in Hydrocarbon Reservoirs Characterization. Universidade de Aveiro, p. 183. Pereira, A.D.F., Dos Santos, E.C., Silva, E.P., Leite, K.D.S., De Tritlla, J., Ayres, H.F., De Machin, J., 2013. Santos microbial carbonate reservoirs a challenge. In OTC Brasil Offshore Technology Conference, pp. 1 3. https doi.org 10.4043 24446-MS. Randen, T., Monsen, E., Signer, C., Abrahamsen, A., Hansen, J.O., S ter, T., Schlaf, J., 2000. Three-dimensional texture attributes for seismic data analysis. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts 2000. Society of Exploration Geophysicists, pp. 668 671. https doi.org 10.1190 1.1816155. Randen, T., S nneland, L., 2005. Atlas of 3D seismic attributes, pp. 23 46. https doi. org 10.1007 3-540-26493-0 2. Rezende, M.F., Pope, M.C., 2015. Importance of depositional texture in pore characterization of subsalt microbialite carbonates. offshore Brazil Geological Society, London, Special Publications 418 1 , 193 207. https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.2. 12

[END_OF_PAPER]

Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on April 27, 2015 Tectonic setting and stratigraphic architecture of an Early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonate platform, Sugar Loaf High, Santos Basin, Brazil J. P. BUCKLEY1,2 , D. BOSENCE2 C. ELDERS2,3 1 CGG, Crompton Way, Manor Royal Estate, Crawley, West Sussex, RH10 9QN, UK 2 Department Earth Sciences, Royal Holloway University of London, Egham, Surrey, TW20 0EX, UK 3 Department of Applied Geology, Curtin University of Technology, GPO Box U1987, Perth, WA 6845, Australia Corresponding author e-mail james.buckley cgg.com . Abstract The Sugar Loaf High is an extensive basement structure within the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil, in which all of the elements of the pre-salt hydrocarbon play are present. Following a clastic-dominated early synrift phase, the later synrift and sag phases are characterized by an extensive non-marine carbonate platform over the basement high. The study area within this new 3D seismic dataset contains carbonates stratigraphically equivalent to the reservoirs within the Lula and Sapinhoa fields. Analysis of the 3D seismic data shows that the pre-salt carbonates onlap the basement of the Sugar Loaf High and form aggradational geometries on a platform that has a proximal to distal width of about 100 km and an interpreted relief of some 900 m. The carbonate platform has an aggradational and mounded basinward-facing gullied margin with slope deposits. Progradational units are imaged on the platform top that may be either carbonate or clastic in composition. The platform is preserved beneath evaporites that form the regional seal within the Santos Basin. Platforms of this size are previously unknown from lacustrine settings outside the pre-salt stratigraphy of the Santos and Campos Basins, Brazil. The global importance of the pre-salt hydrocarbon play in the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil Fig. 1 has been apparent since the discovery of the multibillion barrel Lula oil field in 2006. This was followed by a series of additional discoveries including the Ju piter, Carcara , Iara, Libra, Franco and Sapinhoa fields Fig. 2 , which together were producing more than 500 000 barrels of oil equivalent per day in June 2014 Formigli 2014 . This remarkable success is a result of the presence of a world-class source rock, a porous and permeable carbonate reservoir and a multitude of traps beneath a thick, laterally extensive evaporite seal. However, there have been some disappointing well results, mainly related to heterogeneity in the non-marine carbonate reservoir. Prediction of carbonate reservoir quality is therefore the principal uncertainty within this play. Drilling wells in this ultra-deepwater environment, often through more than 1.5 km of salt, is hugely expensive and technically challenging. Thus, the ability to accurately predict reservoir quality ahead of drilling is of particular importance. The need for predictive models of reservoir quality is further emphasized by ambitious drilling programmes, such as the 22 new wells anticipated by Petrobras in 2014 Busquet 2014 . As a result, considerable academic interest and industry investment has been focused on understanding the sedimentation, precipitation and preservation of non-marine carbonates. The hunt for outcrop scale analogues, as well as the interpretation of nano-scale biotic and abiotic fabrics, has received more interest since 2006 than ever before. The Outer High of the Santos Basin Figs 1 2 is host to many significant pre-salt discoveries. The currently producing Lula field is estimated to have 5 8 billion barrels of oil in place Energy Information Administration 2014 and occurs in the north of this feature. This paper presents new 3D seismic data from the Sugar Loaf High Fig. 2 , which is located south of the Lula field and comprises most of the areal extent of the Outer High. The aim of the paper is to examine and interpret the seismic stratigraphy in order to further our understanding of what has been reported to be an unusual, possibly unique, play within lacustrine facies from the rift to drift phase of basin evolution on the Brazilian margin. The seismic data images From Bosence, D. W. J., Gibbons, K. A., Le Heron, D. P., Morgan, W. A., Pritchard, T. Vining, B. A. eds Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 418, http dx.doi.org 10.1144 SP418.13 2015 The Author s . For permissions http www.geolsoc.org.uk permissions. Publishing disclaimer www.geolsoc.org.uk pub ethics Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on April 27, 2015 J. P. BUCKLEY ET AL. Fig. 1. Setting of Santos Basin and Sa o Paolo Plateau, offshore Brazil, SW Atlantic and location of Figure 2 Rio Rio de Janeiro . what is interpreted as a large pre-salt carbonate platform deposited on a basement high during the synrift to sag phase of basin evolution Moreira et al. 2007 . The study area is stratigraphically equivalent to the reservoirs in the Lula and Sapinhoa fields Fig. 2, Gomes et al. 2013 . We believe that these images are the first to be published showing the pre-salt non-marine carbonates of the Santos Basin in detail. The large tens of kilometres wide platform has a basinward-facing escarpment margin with aggradational and progradational stratigraphic geometries similar to features that up until now have only been described from marine carbonate platforms. Geological setting The Santos Basin covers an area of approximately 350 000 km2, extending from the coastal ranges of the Serra do Mar to the outer limits of the Sa o Paulo Plateau. The basin is a complex area of stretched continental crust and volcanics Scotchman et al. 2010 Gomes et al. 2013 that forms a structural high on the outer margin of the basin. The Santos Basin is separated from the Campos Basin to the north by the Cabo Frio High, and the Pelotas Basin to the south by the Florianopolis High. The Santos, Campos and Espirito Santo basins are collectively termed the Greater Campos Basin Fig. 2. Santos Basin showing locations of highs, licensed areas in Santos Outer High as of 2011 , oil and gas fields in black mentioned in text, areas of Cluster 3D and Cluster Extension 3D surveys and this study area. Tupi Field and Lula Field are synonymous after Mann Rigg 2012 Formigli 2014 . Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on April 27, 2015 PRE-SALT CARBONATES OF THE SANTOS BASIN Mello et al. 2002 , and represent a world-class hydrocarbon province, formed as a result of the breakup of west Gondwana in the Late Jurassic Early Cretaceous. The Florianopolis Fracture Zone marks a major feature in the South Atlantic, delineating the southern margin of the South Atlantic salt basin Scotchman et al. 2010 . The Santos Basin contains a greater extent of thick evaporite deposits than the Campos Basin to the north Davison 2007 . The evaporite sequence is of fundamental importance to the active petroleum system not only in terms of providing a regional seal the thermal conductivity of the evaporites reduces the temperature of the deeply buried pre-salt section, preventing overmaturity of the source rock. Exploration in the pre-salt section of the Santos Basin has centred on the Sa o Paulo Plateau Fig. 1 . In particular, exploration and production focus on the Outer High Figs 1 2 , which is also referred to as the Santos External High Carminatti et al. 2008 Gomes et al. 2013 or the Alto Externo Mohriak et al. 2009 . This basement high is defined by mapping a regionally correlatable seismic horizon that corresponds to the unconformity at the base of the evaporite sequence, which largely reflects Aptian palaeotopography Gomes et al. 2013 . The Sa o Paulo Plateau is believed to result from failed attempts to propagate seafloor spreading north of the Florianopolis Fracture Zone, evidenced by the interpreted presence of proto-oceanic crust in the southern part of the Santos Basin, west of the southern part of the Sa o Paulo Plateau Scotchman et al. 2010 Gomes et al. 2013 . Subsequent initiation of seafloor spreading further to the east left the Sa o Paolo Plateau as a segment of thinned continental crust still attached to the South American margin. The Outer High of the Santos Basin is an uplifted basement structure that records a transition from early volcaniclastic deposition to almost continuous carbonate deposition during the Barremian and Aptian. It also marks a period of thermal subsidence or sag during the transition from rift to drift tectonics, as seafloor spreading commenced in the mid-Atlantic Liro Dawson 2000 . The distal location and pronounced elevation of the Outer High resulted in a clastic-starved environment in which carbonate deposition could flourish Moreira et al. 2007 Gomes et al. 2013 . The older carbonates in the pre-salt section are highly fossiliferous lacustrine limestones with abundant coquina beds similar, in part, to those described from the neighbouring Campos Basin Carvalho et al. 2000 Muniz Bosence, this volume, in press . The sag phase deposits are interpreted to have formed in a non-marine depositional environment of increasing salinity, although the exact mechanisms involved in their formation are debated Rezende Pope 2015 Wright Barnett 2015 . Subsequently, an increasingly saline lacustrine environment developed, culminating in the deposition of the overlying Albian evaporite sequence Davison 2007 . The exclusively continental or shallow-water deposits found within the rift and sag intervals suggest that the sediment surface level and base level were similar throughout the Barremian and Aptian Quirk et al. 2012 . Dataset and study area The new data for this paper comes from the Sugar Loaf High SLH, c. 13 500 km2 , the larger of the two large culminations that form the Outer High Fig. 2 . The adjacent Tupi High covers an area of c. 3700 km2 and is host to the Lula oil field. To the east, a series of basement-cored rotated faultblocks form a series of smaller structures including the Jupiter, Peroba and Pau Brasil highs Fig. 2 . Only limited examples of seismic data from the pre-salt of the Santos Basin have previously been published e.g. a regional section in Carminatti et al. 2009 and more detailed sections and images in Gomes et al. 2013 and Mann Rigg 2012 . However, the region is now covered by 42 000 km2 of 3D seismic data Fig. 2 , allowing for an interpretation of the regional-scale structure, as well as enabling the interpretation of an array of different seismic facies within the uppermost carbonate sequences. The data, taken from the Cluster 3D and Cluster Extension 3D surveys over the Outer High Fig. 2 , comprise 3D PSDM seismic data processed using CBM, Kirchhoff and Reverse Time Migration algorithms. No well data are presented. Structural evolution Rifting in the Santos Basin is postulated to have occurred in at least two phases Kusznir Karner 2007 propose Berriasian early Barremian c. 145 126 Ma and late Barremian Aptian c. 125 112 Ma stages. The early and late phases of rifting, and the overlying sag sequence, can all be recognized by distinct unconformity-bounded packages on seismic data studied for this paper Fig. 3 . Another unconformity marks the transition from sag sequence carbonates into evaporites. The basement is composed of folded metamorphosed sedimentary successions and sheared Precambrian rocks, with significant intrusive rocks of Archean and Proterozoic age. This mobile belt basement forms in a weaker lower crust compared with cratonic areas to the north, and results in a wider, greatly extended rifted margin in the Campos and Santos Basins Brune et al. 2014 . The basement structures created lineaments of lithological Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on April 27, 2015 J. P. BUCKLEY ET AL. Fig. 3. Stratigraphic chart with phases of basin evolution after Moreira et al. 2007 Carminatti et al. 2009 Wright Barnett 2015 and representative portion of seismic data from Sugar Loaf High to indicate seismic facies and seismic horizons picked in this study. CGG image Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on April 27, 2015 PRE-SALT CARBONATES OF THE SANTOS BASIN weakness that were preferentially re-activated during rifting Versfelt 2010 . However, the orientation of this ENE WSW Precambrian fabric contrasts with the east west orientation of extension during the Mesozoic Meisling et al. 2001 , resulting in oblique rifting of the margin. The synrift period is characterized by basement involved normal faulting accommodating the regional mechanical subsidence related to continental breakup Karner 2000 . The first stage of rifting corresponds to a period of volcanism, growth faulting and subsequent sedimentary infill of the newly formed sedimentary basin Figs 3 4 . This phase is characterized by synthetic and antithetic faults across the Santos Basin with variation in the thicknesses of sedimentary packages across the Outer High, suggesting that the structures on the SLH began to form at this time. A thick wedge of sediment can be seen basinward of the bounding master fault of the SLH Fig. 5a , in addition to the uplift and rotation of the downthrown fault block. This creates a series of smaller basement-cored structural highs to the east of the SLH, such as the Peroba High Fig. 2 . The geometries observed in the hanging wall growth wedge Fig. 5a suggest that uplift of the SLH probably began during the synrift phase the growth wedge also shows that the relative subsidence of the hanging wall continued during the thermal subsidence phase. On the SLH itself the upper synrift deposits of the Barra Velha Fm tend to show a less prominent wedging geometry than the lower synrift Fig. 4 . This may represent differences in the rate of fault movement that consequently created accommodation space it may also signify an increase in the rate of sedimentation in the latter stages of synrift carbonate accumulation. Faulting on the SLH consists of both synthetic and antithetic faulting relative to the eastern master fault hinge zone , whereas the Tupi sub-high to the north is segmented only by synthetic faults Gomes et al. 2009 . The Santos Basin passive margin experienced intrusive and extrusive volcanism during the rift and drift phases. Igneous activity is thought to have taken place in three phases from the Barremian through to the Aptian 137 131 Ma Camboriu Fm, Fig. 3 , 120 119 Ma and 115 110 Moreira et al. 2007 Scotchman et al. 2010 . The rifting of the southernmost part of the South America plate is associated with the extrusion of flood basalts in the onshore Parana , Campos and Santos Basins Cainelli Mohriak 1999 . The margin then enters a transitional phase or po s-rifte, Moreira et al. 2007 after rifting but before the drift phase. It is during this transitional phase that two of the most important lithologies within the hydrocarbon system are deposited the non-marine carbonate reservoirs of the Barra Velha Fm the Sag Sequence of Carminatti et al. 2009 , and the thick overlying evaporite seal of the Ariri Fm Fig. 3 . These two sequences are separated by a regional unconformity that can be mapped at the base of the salt Karner Gamboa 2007 . The Santos Basin is the widest salt basin in the South Atlantic, and the Outer High is estimated to have been at least 200 km away from both the African and the Brazilian hinge lines before continental breakup Gomes et al. 2013 . The anomalous width of the salt basin here may be the result of a ridge jump event early in its evolution Szatmari et al. 1996 . The arid Aptian climate resulted in a series of elongated salt basins, separated along the margin by igneous intrusions and volcanic massifs Mohriak et al. 2008 . The periodic influx of continental and marine waters into the basin resulted in the deposition of an evaporite sequence at least 1 km thick, possibly reaching 2 km in the main salt depocentres created by thermal subsidence Szatmari et al. 1996 Davison 2007 . Salt flowed basinward on a massive scale in the 10 myr following deposition as the basin tilted towards the east, resulting in virtually zero thicknesses along the inner basin margin and an inflated 2000 4000 m on the outer margins. In the case of the Santos Basin, the Florianopolis High Fig. 1 isolates the basin from the fully marine waters of the Pelotas Basin to the south, resulting in a very different evolutionary history. However, the structural and stratigraphic history of the Campos Basin in the north has similarities to that of the Santos Basin Mohriak Fainstein 2012 , even though the Santos Basin is around three times larger and has twice as much stretched continental crust as the Campos Basin. The transitional phase is also thought to represent the period in which the Santos External High was uplifted relative to the rest of the basin Gomes et al. 2009 . The volcanic-floored sub-basins of the Outer High represent a period of seafloor spreading that was aborted early in its development the abandonment of this tectono-magmatic process ultimately led to the uplift of the Sa o Paulo Plateau. The severely stretched continental crust is interpreted to have been far less dense than the surrounding volcanic crust, resulting in isostatic uplift Gomes et al. 2009, 2013 . Drift tectonics have been prevalent on the Brazilian passive margin since the end of the transitional phase. The initiation of the drift phase is marked by the cessation of rifting and the commencement of oceanic crust accretion in the mid-Atlantic at around 110 112 Ma Moreira et al. 2007 Scotchman et al. 2010 . The Outer High has remained a positive feature throughout its long tectonic history, impacting the depositional thicknesses and patterns Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on April 27, 2015 J. P. BUCKLEY ET AL. Fig. 4. West to east seismic section through study area of the Sugar Loaf High with Terminal Horst to the east illustrating major structures and stratigraphic divisions. Key to horizons magenta, base synrift green, intra-synrift yellow, base sag blue, base salt as per Fig. 3 . CGG image Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on April 27, 2015 PRE-SALT CARBONATES OF THE SANTOS BASIN Fig. 5. Seismic sections through basinward margin of the Terminal Horst platform of the eastern margin of the Sugar Loaf High. a West to east dip-section showing Terminal Horst build-ups are within the sag phase and located on the top of the basinward easterly facing slope underlain by eastward-dipping faults. Note backstepping of margin through synrift to sag sequence. b Strike section indicates build-ups with aggradational geometries that are onlapped and overlain by evaporites. Key to horizons magenta, base synrift green, intra-synrift yellow, base sag blue, base salt as per Fig. 3 . CGG images of accumulation of both the transitional phase sag carbonates and evaporites, and the overlying postbreakup sediment packages from Late Cretaceous to Neogene Gomes et al. 2009 . Stratigraphic evolution of the SLH The SLH and the other highs present within the Sa o Paulo Plateau record many similarities in their stratigraphic evolution basement highs in each case provide the elevated topography upon which carbonate sediments accumulated. These highs were located in a distal setting in the basin, thereby providing isolation from external clastic input and favouring the accumulation of carbonate sediments. The metamorphic basement is overlain by Valanginian Hauterivian basalts of the Camboriu Formation Moreira et al. 2007 , which formed part of the Parana volcanic province. The basalt sequence is estimated to be at least 400 m thick Quirk et al. 2012 . Volcanism was extensive during the pre-rift and early synrift, with the outpouring of basalt associated with the earliest stages of the breakup of Gondwana Riley Knight 2001 . Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on April 27, 2015 J. P. BUCKLEY ET AL. The Camboriu Fm basalts and associated volcaniclastics mark a distinctive change in reflector type at the base of the synrift sequence on the seismic data Fig. 3 . The synrift deposits occur as two packages, reflecting two phases of rifting separated by an unconformity surface Fig. 3 . This unconformity is thought to be equivalent to the Pre-Alagoas unconformity of Wright Barnett 2015 . The lower synrift packages show wedging geometries in the hanging walls of the high-frequency extensional faults across the SLH Figs 3 4 . These deposits are recorded as fluvio-lacustrine sandstones, conglomerates and playa mudstones of the Pic arras and Itapema Formations, and also as containing some extrusive volcanics Moreira et al. 2007 Carminatti et al. 2009 . The upper part of the synrift is a carbonatedominated sequence Barra Velha Fm made up of a variety of lithologies including a world-class source rock equivalent to the Lagoa Feia Gp of the Campos Basin and fossiliferous molluscan-rich coquina facies, which also form a prolific reservoir in the Campos Basin Carvalho et al. 2000 . This unit is interpreted to have formed in a lacustrine environment Carminatti et al. 2009 . The synrift and the overlying sag sequence are expressed on seismic by the evolution to tectonic quiescence during the sag phase Figs 3 4 . The base of sag unconformity probably equates to the Intra-Alagoas unconformity of Wright Barnett 2015 . Most of the extensional faulting on the SLH terminates at the base of sag unconformity and the growth wedges seen in the synrift are largely absent within the sag sequence. The sag phase carbonates record a variety of different seismic facies the most common configuration is for the sag sequence to onlap, infill and drape the antecedent rift topography Figs 3 4 . Aggradational build-ups and progradational clinoforms are also present and are discussed in detail below. The sag succession is thought to have been deposited over a period of around 7 myr Karner Gamboa 2007 . The upper part of the Barra Velha Fm passes from lacustrine coquina limestones into a microbialite chemically precipitated non-marine carbonate succession Wright Barnett 2015 . The absence of unambiguous palaeoecologically significant fossils, together with the presence of the mineral stevensite rather than marine-derived evaporites sulphates and chlorides , indicates an alkaline lacustrine setting with a volcanic source area Wright Barnett 2015 . The Barra Velha Fm exceeds 500 m in thickness and together with the underlying Itapema and Pic arras Formations comprises some 4200 m of section Wright Barnett 2015 . Seismic stratigraphy of the SLH Sag sequence The oldest interface interpreted from the seismic data is that between the basement and the base of the synrift this is typically a peak reflector SEG Normal , which represents an increase in acoustic impedance as the lithology changes from basal clastic synrift infill to the underlying volcanics of the Camboriu Formation Figs 3 4 . The lower and upper synrift units are separated by a variably developed unconformity Fig. 3 . This can be a very subtle feature to interpret on the seismic data. The lower synrift fill tends to be thicker than that of the upper synrift, with more steeply dipping and wedging geometries. Another unconformity separates the upper synrift from the sag sequence, which was deposited in the largely quiescent transitional phase between rift and drift tectonics. The reflectors within this package are largely unfaulted, parallel low angle dip and commonly onlap the unconformity surface Figs 3 5 . The sag sequence records a series of seismic features that help to build a regional picture of structural evolution and sedimentation in the basin. These are discussed in more detail in the following section. The thickness of the sag sequence is strongly influenced by the different depositional environments on the high, which appear to be primarily dictated by proximity to the base level of lacustrine waters. The interplay between deposition and erosion, as well as the potential for an influx of locally-derived detrital sediment, make for a series of complex relationships across the SLH. As can be seen in Figure 4, the sag sequence is not present over all of the SLH. This is also evident in previously published images of the Lula field Carminatti et al. 2009 Scotchman et al. 2010 , where the sag sequence can be seen to thin and onlap tilted basement fault-blocks that subcrop the base evaporite unconformity. The extent of the sag sequence on the crest of the SLH appears to relate to both erosional and depositional factors, although isolating their relative importance is difficult. Truncated reflectors at the top of the sag sequence suggest that initial deposition over most of the SLH was followed by erosion of the higher topography as base level fell. The very uppermost areas may have been sites of non-deposition, although there is no conclusive evidence to suggest that non-deposition was more or less likely than deposition followed by erosion. The dominant lithologies of the crestal area of the SLH are most likely a combination of exposed uplifted basement and early synrift deposits. Downdip from the crest of the high, in addition to the Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on April 27, 2015 PRE-SALT CARBONATES OF THE SANTOS BASIN onlapping and draping architecture of the sag sequence, is a Terminal Horst Platform with an eastward-facing escarpment margin and an area with prograding clinoforms, which are both described in detail below. The base evaporite reflectors onlap and infill the gullies between the reflectors. The overall bathymetric relief of this margin on the footwall to the bounding fault is approximately 900 m and the maximum angle of slope varies from 16 to 218. Terminal Horst Platform Discussion One of the most prominent features seen within the sag sequence is an aggradational flat-topped area with a series of build-ups located on the eastern margin of the SLH Figs 4 5 . This is labelled the Terminal Horst Platform and its eastern margin marks the break of slope where the Sa o Paulo Plateau meets the deeper basin. The platform overlies a relatively thin synrift package compared with the thickened synrift sequences in the adjacent half-graben Fig. 5a . This implies a positive structure for the Terminal Horst Platform during synrift deposition. The platform is a north south elongate flat-topped structure that extends for 65 km along the margin of the SLH and is about 10 km wide west east Fig. 6 . The northern and southern ends of the platform are not seen in the study area. The west east section Fig. 5a indicates a preserved mounded margin and slope that originated in the upper synrift and shows aggradational stacking with some backstepping of the margin through the sag sequence to the base evaporites unconformity. A prominent feature of the platform is the serrated eastward, or basinward, facing margin. The serrations are a series of promontories, with intervening gullies, spaced at between 5 and 12 km apart Figs 5b 6 . The promontories vary in planview shape from short ,15 km transverse ridges parallel to the margin to triangular projections to elongate promontories extending eastward out into the basin Figs 5b 6 . Downslope they pass into areas with either rough or smooth relief. In cross-section the promontories are typically around 300 m in height, with a variable lateral extent ranging from 2 to 5 km Figs 5b 6a . Their cross-sectional morphology varies from sharp and angular peaks with a steep relief to more rounded, gentler peaks. The internal reflectors of the promontories appear to be aggradational with an essentially flat basal reflector at the base of the sag unit that evolves vertically into convex-up reflectors that eventually conform to the final surface of the promontories Figs 5b 6a . While lateral truncation of some of the reflectors could be interpreted, the majority of the promontories are interpreted as aggradational constructions or build-ups. Subsequent erosion of the margins of these features to create gullies Figs 5b 6 may also be interpreted. As these structures have not been drilled and we are unaware of other such features being described from the South Atlantic basins, all possible interpretations need to be explored. The seismic data indicate that the promontories are layered so it has been considered that they could comprise siliciclastic, evaporite or carbonate sediments, or volcanic strata. Although in longitudinal section the promontories have similar aggradationally stacked reflectors to volcanoes e.g. Burgess et al. 2013 , the morphology of the entire margin with its flat top and serrated edge does not conform to a volcanic edifice. Siliciclastic strata fill lows rather than build promontories if the strata were siliciclastic and the serrated margin and entire escarpment were purely erosional, the internal reflectors of the promontories would parallel the base sag unconformity. Crosssections show this not to be the case instead they indicate aggradational reflector geometries. Evaporites, possibly in the form of diapiric structures, can also be discounted as the seismic character of the sag sequence is quite different from that of the overlying evaporites that have been proven from drilling Carminatti et al. 2009 . A carbonate origin seems more likely and is consistent with the knowledge that the late synrift of the Barra Valha Fm of the Santos Basin largely comprises carbonate lithologies Moreira et al. 2007 Carminatti et al. 2009 Terra et al. 2009 10 . It is further supported by the correlation on regional seismic lines of the sag phase unit from the drilled carbonates of the Lula field to the equivalent unit on the SLH Gomes et al. 2013 . Carbonate platforms commonly form nearvertical or escarpment margins to a flat-topped structure in marine environments James Ginsburg 1979 Read 1985 . The promontories have many of the features of the morphology, internal structure and relationship to overlying strata that are characteristics of carbonate build-ups as opposed to other structures Burgess et al. 2013 . Similar serrated margins are present on the east facing margin of the Tupi sub-high and the smaller Peroba High Figs 2 6b, c this morphology is not evident on any of the west-facing slopes in this dataset. Thus it would appear that the east-facing slopes are the sites of preferential aggradation on each of the platforms. These aggradational structures are seen to manifest as mounded margins of the platform as imaged Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on April 27, 2015 J. P. BUCKLEY ET AL. Fig. 6. a 3D view of base evaporites horizon of the Terminal Horst Platform. Westward view illustrates eastern margin of the platform showing build-ups on top of slope and possible mass failure scars and down-slope redeposited facies on slope width of view is c. 36 km . Serrated margins of nearby b Peroba and c Lula, or Tupi Highs base evaporites depth horizon for locations of highs, see Fig. 2 . CGG images on the dip section Fig. 5a . This margin appears to originate in the late synrift on the footwall of the eastern bounding fault to the Terminal Horst but then backsteps and finally aggrades to its current position. Therefore, although the mounds appear initially to be located close to the fault, for most of its history the mounded margin backsteps westward away from the fault so that the aggradational constructions seen on the sub-salt surface Fig. 6a are about 5 km to the west of the eastern fault. Downslope of the serrated margin are a series of what are interpreted as mass failure scars Fig. 6a . The dip section of the base of slope shows a thicker sag-age sequence, as well as large-scale debris Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on April 27, 2015 PRE-SALT CARBONATES OF THE SANTOS BASIN flow morphologies that suggest a collapse of the escarpment margin. These are frequently seen along the slope in our dataset about 65 km . The eroded slopes of the eastern margins of the platforms tend to have a much steeper relief than the corresponding west-facing slopes, which may have encouraged the erosional processes affecting any unstable slope facies. It should be noted that the areas of exposed basement lithology on the eastern margin south of the Terminal Horst do not show this serrated style. It therefore seems likely that these features are lithology dependent, and potentially result from the gravitational collapse of partially lithified carbonate material that formed the mounded facies on the eastern margin of the platform. This basinward facing margin of the SLH shows many similarities to the gullied margins of marine carbonate platforms such as Great Bahama Bank Mulder et al. 2012 and the Miocene Luconia platforms offshore NW Borneo Vahrenkamp et al. 2004 . The similarity of the serrated morphology of the margin in these marine and non-marine environments suggests that there may be a common process. The combination of enhanced rates of localized accumulation, oversteepening and the subsequent downslope collapse that takes place on the margins of modern carbonate platforms may explain the apparent truncations on the edges of the promontories. Prograding clinoforms Directly downslope of the exposed basement at the crest of the eastern end of the SLH are a series of prograding clinoforms. The clinoforms are best developed on the southern margin of a structural depression c. 10 km across to the west of the escarpment margin to the Terminal Horst Platform Fig. 7a . The clinoforms prograde to the north and NE into this depression and typically extend for around 10 km from its southern margin, reaching thicknesses of 450 m Fig. 7b . The clinoforms partially fill the depression and die out into what is interpreted as a deeper-water lacustrine area to the north. The best examples of the clinoforms are located on the southern margin of the depression and thicknesses and extent decrease to the north along the western margin of the depression. There are limited examples of clinoforms visible to the west of the ridge that bounds the northern section of the depression, which are insignificant in thickness and extent in comparison. The clinoforms have a concave-up profile and an average maximum angle of slope of 138. They record several fluctuations in base-level with phases of onlap and aggradation visible within the overall progradational sequence Fig. 7b . Thus base-level occasionally rose during the longer period of still-stand or fall when clinoform progradation occurred. Following the progradation base-level was lowered further resulting in desiccation and evaporite accumulation. Discussion The lithology of the clinoforms cannot be determined on seismic data alone. Regional data indicate that the sag sequence is carbonate-dominated in this area Moreira et al. 2007 Carminatti et al. 2009 Gomes et al. 2013 . However, the location of the clinoforms adjacent to exposed basement and eroded synrift section suggests that they could be of clastic, detrital carbonate or lacustrine carbonate composition. Their maximum observed angle of slope could have developed in any of these lithologies and is not diagnostic. Different hypotheses are explored below. The crestal area of the SLH covers an area of around 2000 km2, with basement and truncated synrift packages being the dominant lithologies subcropping the base evaporite unconformity Fig. 4 . Extensional faulting across the high created a series of rift shoulders that could have focused sediment transport from the updip highs in the south, towards the structural lows downdip to the north Fig. 7a . This is consistent with the thicker and more extensive clinoforms that can be seen here on the seismic data. The western margin of the depression has a significantly smaller updip sediment source area than the southern margin, which may explain why the clinoforms are less developed there. If detrital input to the system was dominant, instead of carbonate accumulation, the clinoforms here may represent the formation of an alluvial fan or a delta depositing clastics at or near the margin of the palaeo-depression. One of the key problems in attempting to validate this hypothesis is that, whilst synrift reflectors can be seen to truncate at the base of the evaporites, the basement is virtually characterless on seismic and therefore any contribution of detrital basement clastic sediment cannot be quantified via mass balance calculations. The erosional truncation of synrift reflectors in close proximity to the crest of the high means that there is potential for a mixed clastic carbonate sequence being redeposited downslope. However, whether carbonates here have been subject to erosion as opposed to non-deposition is difficult to determine the carbonate sequences can be seen to onlap the tilted and uplifted basement in the areas of lower topography, with the upper limit of depositional onlap unclear. The seismic data suggest that there was at least some clastic input from the large Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on April 27, 2015 J. P. BUCKLEY ET AL. Fig. 7. a 3D west facing view of platform top area of Terminal Horst with platform top lows NW of the serrated margin and slope. Clinoforms prograde from the SW into the platform lows. b Southwest to NE cross-section illustrating prograding geometries into the platform low. Key to horizons magenta, base synrift green, intra-synrift yellow, base sag blue, base salt as per Fig. 3 . CGG images area of exposed basement during the late synrift and sag phase. However, the relative volumes cannot be inferred from the available data. Figure 4 shows thicker synrift units downslope, and their relationship with the exposed higher topography. Some erosional truncation of the synrift is evident, possibly accounting for a proportion of the clinoform source material. If the truncated strata are early synrift lithologies, a significant volume of lower synrift clastics would have entered the system in addition to the carbonate-dominated upper synrift. Whether this clastic input from the lower synrift, in addition to possible contributions from the exposed basement, was significant enough to overwhelm carbonate accumulation downslope is not resolvable from seismic data alone. Large volumes of sag phase material from the SLH are visible in the basin beyond the eastern hinge zone, suggesting that a significant amount of erosion and redeposition was taking place along this margin during this period. However, the volumetric contribution of basement clastics in addition to what is interpreted to be carbonate from the Terminal Horst Platform is unknown. The funnelling effect Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on April 27, 2015 PRE-SALT CARBONATES OF THE SANTOS BASIN Fig. 8. Sketch to illustrate location and simplified stratigraphic geometries of clinoforms and Terminal Horst carbonate platform within sag phase of SLH. Sketch shows final stratigraphy of sag sequence and interpreted former base level. of the north south-trending rift shoulders may have meant that clastic-dominated deposition was confined to a relatively small area on the margin of the structural depression on the SLH. Alternatively, if there was minimal clastic input from the crest of the SLH then the clinoforms could be composed of carbonate material. This material may have been derived from an upslope area of shallow carbonate production that was subsequently eroded or be essentially in situ accumulations of lacustrine carbonates on a prograding lake margin. The clinoforms represent an excess of supply over accommodation and progradation to fill in the structural lows on the platform. The downstepping architecture of the clinoforms and their updip erosion suggests they have formed during a phase of reducing accommodation, with phases of base-level rise but overall, they conform to a forced regression or falling stage systems tract. However, these features are known in both clastic and carbonate systems Hunt Tucker 1992 . Conclusions Tectonic setting The Lower Cretaceous pre-salt stratigraphy of the portion of the SLH described in this paper appears to be similar to that described elsewhere for the Santos Basin e.g. Carminatti et al. 2009 . Unconformably overlying the basement is a synrift unit characterized by strata that wedge into numerous half-graben. These relate to a phase of east west extension and both synthetic and antithetic faults are seen. From regional data the early synrift unit could be volcanic, clastic or carbonate in lithology. In the study area, no seismic facies indicating early synrift carbonates have been identified and the deposits appear to fill the lows in the style of clastic sediment accumulation. The literature proposes e.g. Moreira et al. 2007 that the early synrift is overlain by an increasingly carbonate-dominated late synrift section, which is perhaps evidenced by much lower-angle wedging above the intrasynrift unconformity. The synrift examined in this study is overlain by a sag sequence which onlaps, drapes and infills accommodation space but also shows aggradational geometries typical of carbonate deposits. From regional data this unit is reported as mainly comprising lacustrine carbonates Carminatti et al. 2009 Terra et al. 2009 10 Gomes et al. 2013 and this lithology is interpreted in this study from the seismic geometries observed see below . The SLH has a steeper, faulted eastern basinward margin, separated by a synrift half-graben from the fault-bound Peroba High that also has synrift and sag phase deposits. Reduced fault movement is recorded in the sag phase strata as clinoforms infill a fault-bound north south trough within the platform top. As rifting decreased, during which time continental sediments, volcanics and latterly carbonates accumulated, the high underwent prolonged thermal subsidence. During this phase the SLH formed an isolated high in a very extensive lacustrine system and formed the substrate for the development of a large carbonate platform. Lacustrine carbonate platform The interpreted accumulation of carbonate strata on and around the SLH described in this work has many of the morphological characteristics of carbonate platforms developed in marine environments, namely a flat-topped structure, a distinct margin with localized aggradational build-ups and a steep slope with some erosional scars and redeposited sediment Fig. 8 . The scale of the structure is also similar to that encompassed by its marine counterparts. The SLH has a proximal to distal width of some 100 km, extends along-strike for over 200 km and has an interpreted relief of some 900 m. Such a structure is unknown in the literature from other ancient or modern lacustrine systems Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on April 27, 2015 J. P. BUCKLEY ET AL. but is similar in scale to other pre-salt platforms offshore Brazil Carminatti et al. 2009 Muniz Bosence, this volume, in press . Published models for lacustrine carbonates focus on three main sites for the accumulation of insitu build-ups lake margin bioherms biostromes, shallow lake floor bioherms biostromes and spring fed thermal or groundwater build-ups Wright 2012 Della Porta 2015 . The aggradational buildups interpreted in this study on the eastern margin of the SLH platform could either be subaqueous mounds bioherms preferentially located on the footwall scarp of the SLH or spring-fed hydrothermal build-ups originating above the fault-bound eastern margin. The latter interpretation is not supported by the seismic data as most of the marginal build-ups are not sited over visible faults. The build-ups arise from flat-lying reflectors and are some 5 km from the eastern block-bounding fault. The build-ups are therefore more akin to sedimentary mounds bioherms cf. Baskin et al. 2015 Bucheim Awramik 2015 than to travertine ridges cf. Della Porta 2015 and references therein . The relatively planar upper surface to the platform and the consistent thickness of the marginal aggradational facies belt prior to collapse suggests a subaqueous origin being constrained by a previous lake level. A hydrothermally sourced deposit that could be subaqueous cf. Pyramid Lake or subaerial cf. Italian ridge travertines would be expected to be more prone to height variation along the margin according to the relative volumes of fluids and their associated water chemistry. The erosion of the eastern margin of the SLH and redeposition of sediment from the margin into the basin appears to correlate with a thickening of strata in the basin, which attests to an increase in carbonate production over accommodation on this margin. This relationship is also suggested by the presence of the clinoforms Fig. 8 although these may be carbonate, mixed clastic carbonate or pure clastic in origin. Based purely on seismic data, it is not possible to state what the lithology might be. The angle of slope is too low 138 to be diagnostic clear mounded or aggradational build-ups are not seen, but neither is a feeder channel from the presumed source area to the south. Geological evolution of the SLH Erosion of SLH. A long period of erosion preceded the accumulation of Lower Cretaceous strata on this basement high. The basement was exposed to erosion through the synrift and possibly sag phases and truncated reflectors in the synrift indicate erosion on the footwall shoulders and the crest of the SLH. Flooding and submergence of the SLH. Whilst the crest of the SLH was most likely exposed during the synrift and sag phases, this distally located basement high formed a positive structure that was eventually submerged by rising lake levels. Flooding is indicated by onlap and aggradational geometries in this isolated, presumed largely clastic-free, lacustrine carbonate platform. The uppermost limit of the clinoforms and the top of the aggradational buildups on the eastern margin of the platform represent lake level at this time Fig. 8 . Carbonates on the margin of the high are aggrading at this point, forming a raised rim on the edge of the platform and represent the highest lake level reached. Owing to their common height, they are not considered to be subaerial tufa or fault-related travertine pinnacles or ridges, rather subaqueous, platform margin mounds bioherms. Receding lake levels. Evidence for relative lake level fall comes from two sources. Firstly the clinoforms near the top of the sag phase show downstepping sigmoidal geometries indicating base-level fall. This fall was not continuous and small aggradational packages indicate episodic lake level rises. The margin of the platform also shows some features that can be attributed to base-level fall erosional scars, redeposited slope facies and thickened units in nearby basinal areas. Evaporite accumulation. The overlying Albian evaporites must represent a final Early Cretaceous base-level rise to provide the accommodation for the c. 2 km of evaporites that overlie the pre-salt carbonates. Economic implications The Terminal Horst Platform described in this study from seismic data suggests some similarities and some differences with the economically important Lula or Tupi field. Although little detail has been published on this field, with the exceptions of Carminatti et al. 2009 and Gomes et al. 2013 , the reservoir interval is stated to be within lacustrine carbonates of the sag sequence that onlap a basement high and are sealed by overlying evaporites. The sag sequence has been traced laterally on regional seismic sections to the SLH where we demonstrate an onlapping sag sequence together with the overlying evaporites. In this study, however, we are able to image, describe and interpret some of the depositional morphology of the carbonate unit and propose some prospective primary reservoir facies. The Terminal Horst Platform on the eastern margin of the SLH is interpreted as a flat-topped carbonate platform with a mounded and aggradational margin and steep basinward Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on April 27, 2015 PRE-SALT CARBONATES OF THE SANTOS BASIN facing slope. Although we do not know what the lithologies are, the margin to the platform is in a shallow-water, high-energy site and the mounds are likely to have had primary framework porosity. This would be expected whether the mounds were constructed as boundstones or cementstone or a combination of these two Bosence et al., this volume, in press . This, together with the evaporite seal, makes the platform margin mounds a potential reservoir target. Also on the platform top are the prograding units. The upper zone of these units would be in a shallow, high-energy lacustrine setting and whether the grains are carbonate, clastic or detrital carbonate, they would be likely to preserve primary porosity. Both of these targets are located at the top of the interpreted carbonate stratigraphy where reflectors are erosionally truncated at the base evaporite unconformity. They are therefore likely to have been subaerially exposed during this base-level fall. Whilst evidence of karst development is not seen, some secondary porosity may have been generated during this phase. However, if the primary mineralogy of these pre-salt carbonates is calcitic rather than aragonitic Wright Barnett 2015 , this would have been minor. Finally, coarse facies may have accumulated in large volumes as redeposited carbonates on the eastfacing slope to the platform. Whilst the seal for such a play is commonly problematic owing to up-dip migration, there may be some stratigraphic or structural trapping mechanisms to make these slope carbonates prospective. Thanks are due to CGG for permission to publish the seismic data on which this paper is based. The senior author also wishes to thank CGG for funding during his MSc in Petroleum Geoscience at Royal Holloway University of London which provided the basis for this paper, in addition to the guidance and support given by the CGG MCNV department. The authors wish to thank our referees, Graham Pritchard and Frances Abbots, whose comments and criticisms have helped us focus and develop the paper, and to editor Bernie Vining for improving our manuscripts. References Baskin, R. L., Driscoll, N. W. Wright, V. P. 2013. Controls on lacustrine microbialite distribution in Great Salt Lake, Utah. In Vining, B., Gibbons, K., Morgan, W., Bosence, D., Le Heron, D., Le Ber, E. Pritchard, T. eds Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. Programme and Abstract Volume, 70 71, http www.geolsoc.org.uk pgresources Bosence, D. W. J., Gibbons, K., Le Heron, D. P., Pritchard, T. Vining, B. In press. Microbial carbonates in space and time introduction. In Bosence, D. W. J., Gibbons, K., Le Heron, D. P., Pritchard, T. Vining, B. eds Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 418, http dx.doi.org 10. 1144 SP418.14 Brune, S., Heine, C., Pe rez-Gussinye , M. Sobolov, S. 2014. Rift migration explains continental margin asymmetry and crustal layer hyper-extension. Nature Communications, 5, http dx.doi.org 10.1038 ncomms5014 Buchheim, H. B. Awramik, S. M. 2013. Microbialites of the Eocene Green River Formation as analogs to the South Atlantic pre-salt carbonate hydrocarbon reservoirs. In Vining, B., Gibbons, K., Morgan, W., Bosence, D., Le Heron, D., Le Ber, E. Pritchard, T. eds Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. Programme and Abstract Volume, 64 65, http www.geolsoc.org.uk pgresources Burgess, P. M., Winefield, P., Minzoni, M. Elders, C. 2013. Methods for identification of isolated carbonate buildups from seismic reflection data. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, 97, 1071 1098. Busquet, F. 2014. In the pre-salt layer, in 2013, the proven reserves of Petrobras increased 43 and production hit record with 371 000 barrels of oil per day. http www.presalt.com en component content article 255english-texts presaltexplorationproduction 2513-in-thepre-salt-layer-in-2013-the-proven-reserves-of-petrobrasincreased-43-and-production-hit-record-with-371 000barrels-of-oil-per-day.html Cainelli, C. Mohriak, W. 1999. Some remarks on the evolution of sedimentary basins along the eastern Brazilian continental margin. Episodes, 22, 206 216. Carminatti, M., Wolff, B. Gamboa, L. A. P. 2008. New exploratory frontiers in Brazil. In 19th World Petroleum Congress, Madrid, 29 June to 3 July 2008. Carminatti, M., Dias, J. L. Wolf, B. 2009. From turbidites to carbonates breaking paradigms in deep waters. In Offshore Technology Conference, Houston, TX, OTC 20124. Carvalho, M. D., Praca, U. M., Silva-Telles, A. C., Jahnert, R. J. Dias, J. L. 2000. Bioclastic carbonate lacustrine facies models in the Campos Basin Lower Cretaceous , Brazil. In GierlowskiKordesch, E. H. Kelts, K. R. eds Lake Basins Through Space and Time. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa, OK, Studies in Geology, 46, 245 256. Davison, I. 2007. Geology and tectonics of the south Atlantic Brazilian salt basins. In Ries, A. C., Butler, R. W. H. Graham, R. H. eds Deformation of the Continental Crust The Legacy of Mike Coward. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 272, 345 359. Della Porta, G. 2015. Carbonate build-ups in lacustrine, hydrothermal and fluvial settings comparing depositional geometry, fabric types and geochemical signature. In Bosence, D. W. J., Gibbons, K., Le Heron, D. P., Pritchard, T. Vining, B. eds Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. Geological Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on April 27, 2015 J. P. BUCKLEY ET AL. Society, London, Special Publications, 418, first published online March 3, 2015, http dx.doi.org 10. 1144 SP418.4 ENERGY INFORMATION ADMINISTRATION 2014. Overview Brazil is the 8th largest total energy consumer and 10th largest producer in the world. http www.eia.gov countries cab.cfm fips br Formigli, J. 2014. 500 mil barris de o leo por dia no Pre -Sal. http investidorpetrobras.com.br en presen tations 500-thousand-barrels-per-day-in-the-pre-saltjose-formigli-head-of-upstream-available-only-in-por tuguese-version.htm Gomes, P. O., Kildonk, B., Miken, J., Grow, T. Barragan, R. 2009. The Outer High or the Santos Basin, Southern Sa o Paulo Plateau, Brazil Pre-Salt Exploration Outbreak, Paleogeographic Setting, and Evolution of the Syn-Rift structures. In AAPG International Conference and Exhibition, Cape Town, 26 29 October, 2008. http www.searchanddiscovery.com docu ments 2009 10193gomes images gomes.pdf Gomes, P. O., Kilsdonk, W., Grow, T., Minken, J. Barragan, R. 2013. Tectonic evolution of the outer high of the Santos Basin, southern Sa o Paulo Plateau, Brazil, and implications for hydrocarbon exploration. In Gao, D. Tectonics and Sedimentation Implications for Petroleum Systems. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa, OK, Memoirs, 100, 125 142. Hunt, D. Tucker, M. E. 1992. Stranded parasequences and the forced regressive wedge systems tract deposition during base-level fall. Sedimentary Geology, 81, 1 9. James, N. P. Ginsburg, R. N. 1979. The Seaward Margin of Belize Barrier and Atoll Reefs. International Association of Sedimentologists, Special Publications, 3, Oxford, UK. Karner, G. D. 2000. Rifts of the Campos and Santos Basins, Southeastern Brazil distribution and timing. In Mello, M. R. Katz, B. J. eds Petroleum Systems of South Atlantic Margins. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa, OK, Memoirs, 73, 301 315. Karner, G. D. Gamboa, L. A. P. 2007. Timing and origin of the South Atlantic pre-salt sag basins and their capping evaporites. In Schreiber, B. C., Lugli, S. Babel, M. eds Evaporites through Space and Time. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 285, 15 35. Kusznir, N. J. Karner, G. D. 2007. Continental lithospheric thinning and breakup in response to upwelling divergent mantle flow application to the Woodlark, Newfoundland and Iberia margins. In Karner, G. D., Manatschal, G. Pinheiro, L. M. eds Imaging, Mapping and Modelling Continental Lithosphere Extension and Breakup. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 282, 389 419. Liro, L. M. Dawson, W. C. 2000. Reservoir systems of selected basins of the South Atlantic. In Mello, M. R. Katz, B. eds Petroleum Systems of the South Atlantic Margin. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa, OK, Memoirs, 73, 77 92. Mann, J. Rigg, R. D. 2012. New geological insights into the Santos Basin. GEO ExPro, 9, 39 40. Meisling, K. E., Cobbold, P. R. Mount, V. S. 2001. Segmentation of an obliquely rifted margin, Campos and Santos basins, southeastern Brazil. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, 85, 1903 1924. Mello, M. R., Macedo, J. M., Requejo, R. Schiefelbein, C. 2002. The Great Campos a Frontier for New Giant Hydrocarbon accumulations in the Brazilian Sedimentary Basins Abstract . American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, 85, 13. Mohriak, W. U. Fainstein, R. 2012. Phanerozoic Regional Geology of the Eastern Brazilian Margin. Phanerozoic Passive Margins, Cratonic Basins and Global Tectonic Maps. Elsevier, Oxford. Mohriak, W. U., Rosendahl, B. R., Turner, J. P. Valente, S. C. 2002. Crustal architecture of South Atlantic volcanic margins. In Menzies, M. A. et al. eds Volcanic Rifted Margins. Geological Society of America, Boulder, CO, Special Papers, 362, 159 202. Mohriak, W. U., Nemcok, M. Enciso, G. 2008. South Atlantic divergent margin evolution rift-border uplift and salt tectonics in the basins of SE Brazil. In Pankhurst, R. J., Trouw, R. A. J., Brito Neves, B. B. De Wit, M. J. eds West Gondwana Pre-Cenozoic Correlations Acroiss the South Atlantic Region. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 294, 365 398. Mohriak, W. U., Szatmari, P. Couto Anjos, S. M. 2009. Sal Geologia e Tecto nica. Beca, Sa o Paolo, Brazil. Moreira, J. L. P., Madeira, C. V., Gil, J. A. Machado, M. A. P. 2007. Bacia de Santos. Boletim de Geociencas da Petrobras, 15, 531 549. Mulder, T., Ducassou, E. et al. 2012. New insights into the morphology and sedimentary processes along the western slope of Great Bahama Bank, Geology, 40, 603 606. Muniz, M. C. Bosence, D. W. J. In press. Pre-salt microbialites from the Campos Basin Offshore Brazil Image Log Facies, Facies Model and Cyclicity in Lacustrine Carbonates. In Bosence, D. W. J., Gibbons, K., Le Heron, D. P., Pritchard, T. Vining, B. eds Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 418, http dx.doi.org 10.1144 SP418.10 Quirk, D. G., Schodt, N., Lassen, B., Ings, S. J., Hsu, D., Hirsch, K. K. von Nikolai, C. 2012. Salt tectonics on passive margins examples from Santos, Campos Kwanza basins. In Alsop, G. I., Hartley, A. J., Grant, N. T. Hodgkinson, R. eds Salt Tectonics, Sediments and Prospectivity. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 363, 207 244. Read, J. F. 1985. Carbonate platform facies models. American Association Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, 69, 1 21. Rezende, M. F. Pope, M. C. 2015. Importance of depositional texture in pore characterization of subsalt microbialite carbonates, offshore Brazil. In Bosence, D. W. J., Gibbons, K., Le Heron, D. P., Pritchard, T. Vining, B. eds Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. Geological Society, London, Special Downloaded from http sp.lyellcollection.org by guest on April 27, 2015 PRE-SALT CARBONATES OF THE SANTOS BASIN Publications, 418. First published online February 26, 2015, http dx.doi.org 10.1144 SP418.2 Riley, T. R. Knight, K. B. 2001. Age of break-up Gondwana magmatism. Antarctic Science, 13, 99 110. Scotchman, I. C., Gilchrist, G., Kusznir, N. J., Roberts, A. M. Fletcher, R. 2010. The breakup of the South Atlantic Ocean formation of failed spreading axes and blocks of thinned continental crust in the Santos Basin, Brazil and its consequences for petroleum system development. In Vining, B. A. Pickering, S. C. eds Petroleum Geology From Mature Basins to New Frontiers. Proceedings of the 7th Petroleum Geology Conference, Geological Society, London, 855 866. Szatmari, P., Guerra, M. C. M. Pequeno, M. A. 1996. Genesis of large counter-regional normal fault by flow of Cretaceous salt in the S. Atlantic Santos Basin, Brazil. In Alsop, G. I., Blundell, D. J. Davison, I. eds Salt Tectonics. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 100, 259 264. Terra, G. J. S. et al. 2009 10. Carbonate rock classification applied to Brazilian sedimentary basins. Boletim de Geosciencias da Petrobras, 18, 9 29. Vahrenkamp, V., David, F., Duijndam, P., Newall, M. Crevello, P. 2004. Growth architecture, faulting, and karstification of a middle Miocene carbonate platform, Luconia Province, offshore Sarawak, Malaysia. In Eberli, G., Masaferro, J. L. Sarg, J. F. eds Seismic Imaging of Carbonate Reservoirs and Systems. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa, OK, Memoirs, 81, 329 350. Versfelt, J. W. 2010. South Atlantic Margin Rift Basin Asymmetry and Implications for Pre-Salt Exploration. In American Association Petroleum Geologists International Conference and Exhibition, Rio de Janeiro,15 18 November 2010 abstract . Wright, V. P. 2012. Lacustrine carbonates in rift settings the interaction of volcanic and microbial processes on carbonate deposition. In Garland, J., Neilson, J. E., Laubach, S. E. Whidden, K. J. eds Advances in Carbonate Exploration and Reservoir Analysis. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 370, 39 47. Wright, V. P. Barnett, A. 2015. An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates. In Bosence, D. W. J., Gibbons, K., Le Heron, D. P., Pritchard, T. Vining, B. eds Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 418. First published online February 26, 2015, http dx.doi.org 10.1144 SP418.3

[END_OF_PAPER]

Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Sedimentary Geology journal homepage www.elsevier.com locate sedgeo Deposition, diagenetic and hydrothermal processes in the Aptian Pre-Salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs of the northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil Bruno Eusta quio Moreira Lima a,b, , Luiz Fernando De Ros b, a b Petrobras S.A., Av. Repu blica do Chile 330, 24th floor, East Tower, Rio de Janeiro, RJ 20031-170, Brazil Geosciences Institute, Rio Grande do Sul Federal University, Av. Bento Gonc alves 9500, Porto Alegre, RS 91509-900, Brazil a r t i c l e i n f o Article history Received 31 October 2018 Received in revised form 16 January 2019 Accepted 19 January 2019 Available online 04 February 2019 Editor C. Chague Keywords Pre-Salt Lacustrine carbonates Campos Basin Hydrothermal fluids Dolomitization Silicification a b s t r a c t The discovery of large oil accumulations in the rift and sag Pre-Salt sections of the Campos and Santos Basins has revived interest in the exploration of the lacustrine carbonate reservoirs in the Brazilian and African marginal basins. More than half of Brazilian oil production originates from the Pre-Salt reservoirs of these offshore basins. A study integrating systematic petrography, cathodoluminescence, scanning electron microscopy, microprobe and X-ray diffraction was performed on seven wells in the northern Campos Basin. This study highlights the major primary, diagenetic and hydrothermal features of the Pre-Salt succession, with the aim to improve our understanding of the factors that influence the porosity and permeability distribution in these important lacustrine carbonate reservoirs. The Pre-Salt deposits correspond to bioclastic grainstones and rudstones, syngenetic crusts of fascicular calcite, and intraclastic grainstones and rudstones of reworked crust fragments and calcite spherulites. Magnesian silicates are frequently associated with carbonate deposits. In the sag phase, stevensitic laminations constitute the substrate for the precipitation of calcite crusts and spherulites, which displace and replace the syngenetic magnesian clay deposits. In the rift section, stevensitic ooids are mixed with bioclasts or form ooidal arenites. Pre-Salt carbonate reservoirs have undergone a complex and heterogeneous diagenetic evolution. Eodiagenetic processes include the dissolution, neomorphism and cementation of bivalve bioclasts in the rift, as well as the dissolution of magnesian silicates and their replacement by calcite spherulites, silica and dolomite in the sag section. Burial alterations are commonly associated with hydrothermal fluids carried through faults and fracture systems. These fluids promote dolomitization, silicification, and dissolution at varying degrees and intensities. Eodiagenetic precipitation and dissolution owing to variations in the lake water chemistry and the episodic flow of hydrothermal fluids under burial conditions control the creation, redistribution, and obliteration of porosity in the Pre-Salt reservoirs. 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 1. Introduction In recent years, huge hydrocarbon reserves have been discovered in the so-called Pre-Salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs along the South Atlantic conjugate margins, mainly in the Campos and Santos Basins of Brazil Carminatti et al., 2009 and in the Kwanza Basin of Angola Saller et al., 2016 . Thus, an increasing number of wells are being drilled in this prolific oil province, which provide new data and progressive detail of the complex character of the depositional processes and diagenetic alteration of the Pre-Salt deposits. In several Pre-Salt fields, diagenetic processes have directly altered and or reorganized the Correspondence to B.E.M. Lima, Petrobras S.A., Av. Repu blica do Chile 330, 24th floor, East Tower, Rio de Janeiro, RJ 20031-170, Brazil. Corresponding author. E-mail addresses brunolima petrobras.com.br B.E.M. Lima , lfderos inf.ufrgs.br L.F. De Ros . https doi.org 10.1016 j.sedgeo.2019.01.006 0037-0738 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. porosity architecture of the carbonate fabric, consequently affecting the porosity and permeability characteristics of the reservoir rocks. Pre-Salt reservoirs from the northern Campos Basin occur in the Lower Cretaceous carbonate deposits of the Coqueiros and Macabu Formations Dias et al., 1988 Winter et al., 2007 . The Coqueiros Formation reservoirs correspond to the bioclastic deposits of bivalves, known as coquinas Baumgarten et al., 1988 Dias et al., 1988 Muniz and Bosence, 2015 . The Macabu Formation contains intervals of fascicular calcite and spherulitic aggregates interspersed with intraclastic deposits that have been reworked from these precipitates and laminated strata made of syngenetic magnesian clay minerals and siliciclastic mud e.g., Tosca and Wright, 2014 Wright and Barnett, 2015 Wright and Tosca, 2016 Herlinger Jr. et al., 2017 . Wright and Barnett 2015 proposed that the characteristic deposition of the Aptian Pre-Salt succession is arranged in cyclothems composed of laminated sediments of syngenetic magnesian clays at the base, syngenetic magnesian deposits partially replaced and 56 B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 displaced by calcite spherulites in the middle, and fascicular calcite crusts at the top. According to those authors, the alternation of calcite or stevensite precipitation in these deposits was related to variations in the pH, Mg and Ca activity, temperature, and pCO2 in the geochemistry of lacustrine waters. Wright and Tosca 2016 presented an evaporitic geochemical model to explain the unusual calcite morphologies observed in these cyclothems. Alternatively, the spherulites were interpreted as ooid-like particles formed by nucleation on the sediment-water interface under the influence of organic constituents e.g., Mercedes-Marti n et al., 2016, 2017 Chafetz et al., 2018 . The intense and heterogeneous diagenesis of the Pre-Salt deposits resulted in large vertical and lateral variations in the quality permeability and porosity of the reservoirs. Although depositional features exerted significant control over the diagenetic processes, most of the porosity that is currently present in the Pre-Salt reservoirs is of secondary origin Tosca and Wright, 2015 . Dolomitization, silicification, cementation, dissolution, and or recrystallization were promoted in association with tectonic and hydraulic fracturing Herlinger Jr. et al., 2017 Poros et al., 2017 Vieira de Luca et al., 2017 . It is interpreted that these alterations may have been related to processes occurring during burial and to the flow of hydrothermal fluids. Recently, many authors have pointed out compelling evidence of hydrothermal activity in the Campos e.g., Alvarenga et al., 2016 Lepley et al., 2017 Vieira de Luca et al., 2017 and Kwanza Basins e.g., Teboul et al., 2017, 2019 , associated mainly with magmatic events. The hydrothermal alteration of carbonate deposits has recently been the subject of extensive debate by the scientific community e.g., Machel and Lonnee, 2002 Davies, 2004 Machel, 2004 Davies and Smith, 2006 . In general, the hydrothermal alteration of carbonate sequences involves the action of complex physicochemical processes on pre-existing rocks, which is related to interactions with hot fluids promoting the precipitation of unusual cements, including saddle dolomite, fluorite, barite, anhydrite, sphalerite, and pyrite Neilson and Oxtoby, 2008 . Hydrothermal processes are evidence for a local geothermal anomaly and require a mechanism or conduit that allows fluid flow, such as deep-buried fault systems. The silicification of carbonate sediments can apparently occur at different stages of their diagenetic evolution. Examples of eodiagenetic and mesodiagenetic silicification have been described in the literature e.g., Hesse, 1989 . Packard et al. 2001 reported carbonate reservoirs modified by dolomitization, silicification, and dissolution related to the percolation of hydrothermal fluids. Vieira de Luca et al. 2017 and Poros et al. 2017 suggested that the percolation of hydrothermal fluids promoted extensive silicification in the Pre-Salt reservoirs of the Campos and Kwanza Basins, respectively. The objective of this study is to characterize and interpret the depositional, diagenetic and hydrothermal conditions under which the Pre-Salt reservoirs from the northern Campos Basin were generated and modified. This study will contribute to the development of more realistic reservoir models. Specific aims involve the characterization of processes and products of probable hydrothermal circulation throughout faults and fractures, as well as their impact on the porosity, permeability and heterogeneity of the reservoirs. 2. Geological context The Campos Basin is located on the southeastern Brazilian margin, approximately between the 21st and 23nd south parallels Fig. 1 . It covers a total area of approximately 100,000 km2, with only 5800 km2 onshore. The study area is located in the northern Campos Basin Fig. 1 in deep to ultra-deep waters. The basin originated from rifting of the Gondwana Continent during the Neocomian lowermost Cretaceous , which eventually formed the South Atlantic Ocean through separation of the American and African continents e.g., Rabinowitz and LaBrecque, 1979 Austin and Uchupi, 1982 Nu rnberg and Mu ller, 1991 Cainelli and Mohriak, 1999 . It is aligned with the Kwanza Basin on the African side. Winter et al. 2007 divided the tectono-stratigraphic evolution of the Campos Basin into rift, post-rift, and drift supersequences. The rift supersequence was generated during the initial evolution of the basin and is represented by both the volcanic Cabiu nas Formation and the basal interval of the Lagoa Feia Group, which corresponds to the Itabapoana, Atafona, and Coqueiros Formations, deposited from the Barremian to the Lower Aptian Fig. 2 . According to McKenzie 1978 and White and McKenzie 1988 , the rift phase of the basin, which extended from the Hauterivian to the Aptian, was determined by the extension of the lithosphere and by the asthenospheric elevation, related to widespread intracratonic tholeiitic volcanism Turner et al., 1994 Mohriak et al., 2008 Torsvik et al., 2009 . The basal, rift section portion of the Lagoa Feia Group, is limited at the top by the so-called Pre-Alagoas regional unconformity. The Itabapoana Formation is composed of proximal marginal sediments, including conglomerates, sandstones, siltstones, and red shales, whereas the Atafona Formation mostly comprises arenites and siltstones constituted by ooids of stevensite, kerolite and other syngenetic magnesian layer silicates that accumulated in alkaline lakes Bertani and Carozzi, 1985a, 1985b Dias et al., 1988 Abraha o and Warme, 1990 . The Coqueiros Formation consists of mainly carbonate rudstones and grainstones of ostracod, gastropod and mostly bivalve bioclasts intercalated with organic shales e.g., Baumgarten et al., 1988 Dias et al., 1988 Thompson et al., 2015 . Models proposed for the depositional environment of these rift bioclastic deposits have related these deposits to playa-lake and pluvial-lake environments Bertani and Carozzi, 1985a storm events, bioaccumulated banks, and deep lacustrine environments Carvalho et al., 2000 and gravitational re-deposition from shallow to deeper lacustrine settings Goldberg et al., 2017 . The post-rift supersequence, which contains the upper interval of the Lagoa Feia Group, was deposited on the regional Pre-Alagoas unconformity during the so-called sag stage of the basin. This supersequence comprises the Itabapoana, Gargau , Macabu, and Retiro Formations that were deposited during the Middle Upper Aptian Fig. 2 . The Gargau Formation comprises sandstones, mudrocks, and carbonates deposited in a lacustrine environment, which grade laterally to the proximal clastic sediments of the Itabapoana Formation Winter et al., 2007 . The Macabu Formation was deposited in alkaline lacustrine environments under arid climate conditions and comprises argillaceous and carbonate laminites, spherulitic carbonate deposits and crusts, which were originally interpreted as microbial stromatolites Dias, 2005 Muniz and Bosence, 2015 . These deposits have been re-interpreted as chemical precipitates controlled by the geochemistry of lacustrine waters e.g., Tosca and Wright, 2014 Wright and Barnett, 2014, 2015 Wright and Tosca, 2016 . A hybrid biotic abiotic precipitation probably occurs in the Pre-Salt deposits. However, the abiotic chemical is the dominant control in the precipitation of the majority of the constituents, as evidenced by features that were observed in the petrographic study. The upper portion of the post-rift supersequence corresponds to the Retiro Formation Fig. 2 , which is a thick accumulation of evaporites Upper Alagoas . This sequence was deposited during the advent of marine incursions under arid climate conditions Leyden et al., 1976 Winter et al., 2007 and consists essentially of anhydrite, halite, sylvite, and carnallite. These evaporites provide a stratigraphic seal for the large hydrocarbon accumulations of the Pre-Salt petroleum province. 3. Materials and methods For this study, samples from seven wells, comprising four cores, 358 core plugs and 199 sidewall core samples were taken from pervasively dolomitized and silicified portions of the Pre-Salt interval. Standardthickness thin sections were prepared from 289 blue epoxy resinimpregnated samples for transmitted light microscopy. Staining with Alizarin red-S and potassium ferricyanide solution was applied to all B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 57 Fig. 1. Map showing major structural features of Campos Basin and the location of study area modified from Dias et al., 1988 . thin sections to differentiate the carbonate minerals as outlined by Dickson 1965 . Pore types were classified according to Choquette and Pray 1970 . All thin sections were examined in petrographic microscopes between uncrossed P and crossed polarizers XP . Quantitative petrography was performed on 88 representative thin sections using the Petroledge software version Workstation 3.4.18.1111 by counting 300 points per sample to evaluate the porosity and the primary detrital, syngenetic, and diagenetic constituents of the samples. Cathodoluminescence CL microscopy was conducted on 13 polished thin sections using a hot cathode apparatus mounted on a Zeiss Axiocam MRC polarizing microscope. Scanning electron microscopy with secondary electrons SEM and with backscattered electrons BSE with the support of energydispersive spectrometry EDS was performed at the Regional Center for Technological Development and Innovation CRTI of the Federal University of Goia s UFG . For BSE examination, twelve polished thin sections were coated with carbon in a JEOL-JEE-420 vacuum evaporator. SEM investigation of five samples by backscattered and secondary electrons, was conducted using a JSM-IT300 JEOL electron microscope. Energy-dispersed spectroscopy EDS was performed using an OXFORD X-MaxN X-ray detector equipment with the aim of recognizing the elemental mineral composition in rock fragments and thin sections. Wavelength-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy WDS was conducted for quantitative elemental analysis on nine polished and carbon-coated thin sections, using a JEOL JXA-8230 electron microprobe with five WDS detectors. In addition, twenty thin sections were selected for automated mineralogical distribution mapping using QEMSCAN 650 FEI equipment with two coupled EDS Bruker detectors. X-ray diffraction XRD quantitative analyses were obtained from 453 samples Supplementary material for the identification of the total composition, clay minerals and other constituents in the fine fraction b2 m . Mechanical methods were used to fragment the carbonate samples, while avoiding milling so as not to modify the crystalline structure of the clay minerals. Subsequently, some sample centrifugation steps were performed to separate the clay fractions. In specific cases, with low clay minerals volume, the decarbonation method was used. Quantitative identification of the main clay minerals was performed under air-dried, glycol-saturated, and heated treatments, using the Rietveld Method Young, 1995 . The mineralogy of the bulk samples was determined using a RIGAKU D MAX-2200 PC diffractometer. The total mineralogical qualitative analysis was obtained using Jade 9 software MDI and the PDF-2 mineral database ICDD . Fig. 2. Stratigraphic section of the study area with the Lagoa Feia Group modified from Winter et al., 2007 Herlinger Jr. et al., 2017 . 58 B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 4. Results 4.1. Rift section lithofacies Bioclastic grainstones and rudstones, stevensitic ooidal arenites, and dolostones are the main lithologic types in the rift interval Fig. 3 . Table 1 shows the average and maximum amounts of the main primary detrital, biogenic and syngenetic, chemically precipitated and diagenetic constituents, as well as the pore types in each of these lithologic types, which were analyzed in the Coqueiros Formation. The average petrographic porosity is higher in the rift deposits. Bioclastic grainstones display the highest porosity values, followed by dolostones, stevensitic ooidal arenites and bioclastic rudstones Table 1 . Fracture and breccia porosity types are relatively more important in the stevensitic arenites Fig. 3. Photomicrographs highlighting the main features of primary and diagenetic constituents and the porosity of rift-section deposits. A Rudstone of fragmented, partially dissolved bivalve bioclasts, with well-preserved interparticle and intraparticle pores blue uncrossed polarizers P B Bivalve-gastropod rudstone with interparticle porosity partially filled by bitumen orange arrow P . Note the bioclasts were partially neomorphosed, dissolved, and further cemented by calcite mosaic P C Rudstone of dolomitized bivalve bioclasts with interparticle pores intensely cemented by quartz white P D Stevensitic ooids and peloids completely dissolved and silicified white in stevensitic ooidal arenite P E Moldic and intercrystalline porosity in dolomitized stevensitic ooidal arenite P F Bioclastic rudstone with intraparticle and moldic pores partially cemented by saddle dolomite red arrows . Silica cement white fills interparticle pores P . For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 59 Table 1 Statistical summary of the average and maximum in brackets amounts of major detrital and syngenetic primary constituents, diagenetic constituents, and pore types in the main defined lithologic types of the rift section in the study area. RIFT STAGE Lithologic types Constituents Detrital primary total Mg-clay Calcite Dolomite Microcrystalline silica Chalcedony Quartz Pyrite chalcopyrite galena Sr-barite celestine Svanbergite Bitumen Interparticle porosity Primary porosity total Intercrystalline porosity Intracrystalline porosity Intraparticle porosity Moldic porosity Vug porosity Channel porosity Secondary dissolution porosity total Fracture porosity Breccia porosity Fracture porosity total Total porosity primary, secondary and fracture Paragnetic relation Syngenetic Recrystallized bioclasts Replacing primary constituent Replacing diagenetic constituent Filling primary porosity Filling secondary dissolution porosity Replacing primary constituent Replacing syngenetic constituent Replacing diagenetic constituent Filling primary porosity Filling secondary dissolution porosity Filling fracture porosity Replacing primary constituent Replacing diagenetic constituent Filling primary porosity Filling secondary dissolution porosity Replacing primary constituent Replacing diagenetic constituent Filling primary porosity Filling secondary dissolution porosity Filling fracture breccia porosity Replacing primary constituent Replacing diagenetic constituent Filling primary porosity Filling secondary dissolution porosity Replacing primary constituent Replacing syngenetic constituent Replacing diagenetic constituent Filling secondary dissolution porosity Replacing diagenetic constituent Filling secondary dissolution porosity Filling fracture porosity Replacing diagenetic constituent Filling secondary dissolution porosity Filling secondary dissolution porosity Primary Primary constituent dissolution Diagenetic constituent dissolution Diagenetic constituent dissolution Primary constituent dissolution Primary constituent dissolution Diagenetic constituent dissolution Primary constituent dissolution Diagenetic constituent dissolution Diagenetic constituent dissolution Primary constituent fracture Diagenetic constituent fracture Diagenetic constituent fracture than in the dolostones and bioclastic rudstones. The fracture apertures range from millimetric to centimetric and from totally unfilled to fully cemented. 4.1.1. Bioclastic grainstones and rudstones The constituents of bioclastic grainstones and rudstones are mainly bivalves, ostracods, and gastropods Fig. 3A, B, C . These deposits are commonly massive, locally slightly laminated, poorly to well sorted, and have a chaotic to subparallel orientation of the bioclasts. Partial to total recrystallization, dolomitization and or silicification are common. Bivalves and ostracods present a wide variation in the degree of reworking and occur frequently fragmented but seldom strongly abraded. Bioclast grain size varies between 0.07 and 24.8 mm, with a mode of 2.3 mm. Intraclasts of clay ooids and peloids and microcrystalline Bioclastic grainstones Bioclastic rudstones 0.51 0.67 10.57 27.33 0.36 1.33 1.62 3.67 2.17 5.00 5.73 8.33 39.59 69.33 10.34 15.00 5.32 7.00 1.52 4.67 0.47 1.67 0.34 1.00 0.21 0.67 0.33 0.67 1.47 2.67 0.18 0.33 0.77 1.33 0.18 0.33 0.22 0.33 1.93 3.67 1.93 8.41 10.33 7.16 10.00 0.83 1.67 16.40 18.33 3.49 21.67 14.52 40.33 1.63 18.00 2.96 69.67 12.37 29.33 20.02 47.00 11.36 75.67 0.21 3.33 2.97 14.67 3.35 15.33 0.22 5.33 0.85 20.33 2.11 11.00 1.01 15.67 0.39 1.67 0.42 9.00 0.51 11.67 0.56 7.00 0.34 2.33 0.76 2.67 0.19 0.67 0.41 2.67 1.37 26.33 1.89 34.00 0.05 0.67 0.37 1.67 0.21 1.33 0.86 2.67 0.99 3.33 0.36 2.00 0.39 1.67 2.58 6.00 2.58 2.20 6.67 0.31 3.33 0.27 3.00 4.17 7.67 0.13 2.67 1.94 4.00 1.42 3.67 0.22 1.33 10.65 0.01 0.33 0.03 0.67 0.04 13.27 Stevensitic ooidal arenites Dolostones 1.25 2.33 0.08 0.33 0.33 1.33 0.17 0.67 21.29 38.33 5.04 10.00 6.84 12.33 4.08 14.33 19.59 60.67 7.48 20.67 5.09 19.00 0.42 1.67 0.33 1.33 2.42 9.67 0.58 2.33 0.58 2.33 1.17 3.00 3.09 6.00 1.81 3.67 0.34 0.67 0.27 0.67 0.35 1.33 0.97 1.67 0.97 3.24 4.67 1.75 3.33 1.67 3.67 5.32 9.00 3.15 7.00 0.75 2.67 15.87 0.58 1.33 0.58 17.42 0.52 2.00 0.67 3.33 0.04 0.33 0.11 1.00 15.52 70.33 36.35 87.00 9.89 28.33 1.74 8.67 0.44 2.33 1.04 7.33 2.04 7.33 8.03 35.00 0.70 2.67 0.33 1.00 1.07 7.67 0.65 2.33 2.66 24.33 0.22 1.00 0.33 1.33 7.19 11.67 1.97 5.33 1.22 4.33 2.72 8.00 1.02 4.67 2.85 7.33 0.33 2.67 0.44 3.33 17.75 0.19 1.67 0.19 17.94 carbonate are very common, but in small amounts, and usually occur in the fine-grained sand size. The main diagenetic processes in the bioclastic grainstones and rudstones are micritization of the margins of bioclasts, neomorphism, partial to complete recrystallization and dissolution of bioclasts. The inter- and intraparticle, intercrystalline, moldic, vugular, channel and fracture porosity were filled by drusy rim pore-lining calcite, blocky and saddle dolomite, fibrous chalcedony, prismatic to coarse-crystalline mosaic quartz, and silica. They were also filled in smaller amount by prismatic celestine and Sr-barite, pyrite, svanbergite, and bitumen Table 1 Fig. 3B, F . Svanbergite is a strontium and aluminum phosphate-sulfate that belongs to the APS group of the Woodhouseite series and has the chemical formula SrAl3 PO4 SO4 OH 6. The intensity of the neomorphism and dissolution of the bioclasts are highly variable, 60 B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 Table 2 Statistical summary of the average and maximum in brackets amounts of major detrital and syngenetic primary constituents, diagenetic constituents, and pore types present in the main lithologic types of the sag section in the study area. SAG stage Lithologic types Fascicular calcite crusts Constituents Paragnetic relation Detrital primary total Mg-clay Calcite 0.91 4.67 Syngenetic 0.53 3.00 16.02 53.67 Fascicular crust covering displaced syngenetic constituent Spherulite displacing syngeneic 9.08 22.33 constituent Replacing primary constituent Replacing syngenetic 0.56 2.67 constituent Replacing diagenetic 3.40 11.67 constituent Filling primary porosity 3.33 18.00 Filling secondary dissolution 2.60 13.33 porosity Filling fracture porosity 0.31 3.33 Replacing primary constituent Replacing syngenetic 4.84 13.33 constituent Replacing diagenetic 6.16 17.33 constituent Filling primary porosity 2.78 8.00 Filling secondary dissolution 4.06 25.67 porosity Filling fracture porosity 0.22 2.67 Replacing syngenetic 0.74 2.33 constituent Replacing primary constituent 5.02 23.67 Replacing syngenetic 4.87 15.67 constituent Replacing diagenetic 10.87 31.67 constituent Filling primary porosity Filling secondary dissolution 0.33 2.00 porosity Filling fracture porosity Replacing primary constituent Replacing syngenetic 0.22 3.00 constituent Replacing diagenetic 3.16 19.67 constituent Filling primary porosity 0.04 0.67 Filling secondary dissolution 3.13 11.33 porosity Filling fracture porosity Replacing primary constituent Replacing syngenetic 0.07 0.67 constituent Replacing diagenetic 0.67 4.67 constituent Filling primary porosity 0.04 0.67 Filling secondary dissolution 3.71 19.33 porosity Filling fracture porosity 0.24 3.67 Replacing primary constituent 0.07 1.00 Replacing syngenetic 0.38 1.67 constituent Replacing diagenetic 0.47 3.00 constituent Filling primary porosity 0.93 7.67 Filling secondary dissolution 0.38 4.33 porosity Filling fracture porosity 0.04 0.67 Replacing syngenetic constituent Replacing diagenetic constituent Filling primary porosity 0.54 2.67 Filling secondary dissolution 0.77 3.33 porosity Filling fracture porosity Dolomite Magnesite Microcrystalline silica Chalcedony Quartz Pyrite chalcopyrite galena Sr-barite celestine Claystones with calcite spherulites Laminites 0.53 4.33 0.34 1.67 8.79 16.67 2.96 3.33 1.25 5.00 8.89 12.33 Intraclastic grainstones Intraclastic rudstones Dolostones Cherts 16.72 79.33 0.20 1.33 17.81 23.67 0.75 3.00 0.05 0.67 0.86 5.33 0.07 1.00 0.13 1.33 17.21 39.33 1.69 11.33 4.12 13.00 15.27 47.67 1.13 5.00 5.25 21.00 2.34 4.67 2.26 6.33 1.14 7.67 1.13 8.67 0.67 2.33 0.17 0.67 0.93 3.67 0.67 3.33 0.67 1.67 1.17 4.33 0.32 2.33 0.68 4.00 1.83 4.00 2.17 3.00 0.38 1.33 5.50 10.00 19.50 48.00 25.05 53.00 1.03 5.00 0.75 3.00 13.59 20.00 0.50 2.00 0.93 3.00 24.42 70.33 5.76 17.67 1.10 3.67 4.37 44.67 1.55 17.67 9.47 14.33 18.25 35.00 2.67 7.00 3.04 14.00 19.64 49.67 7.09 31.33 0.34 0.67 1.83 3.67 8.74 11.33 2.87 12.67 1.75 7.00 0.83 1.67 5.41 14.00 1.20 5.33 1.47 2.67 1.25 5.00 0.66 3.67 2.83 3.33 4.34 8.00 0.12 0.67 0.96 3.00 3.33 16.67 21.92 46.67 5.66 32.00 7.47 34.33 2.89 17.67 30.94 36.33 1.93 9.67 7.94 31.67 23.69 49.33 0.07 0.33 1.32 5.33 0.51 2.00 0.76 3.00 0.56 3.67 0.17 0.33 2.50 10.00 2.92 10.00 0.04 0.67 0.31 1.33 4.51 6.67 2.02 12.67 10.93 26.33 0.34 0.67 5.61 9.00 0.53 2.67 1.59 5.67 3.67 10.33 2.79 14.00 0.18 1.33 7.34 26.33 1.25 5.00 1.08 3.00 0.04 0.67 2.05 3.33 0.13 0.67 1.10 3.67 1.91 7.33 9.04 11.67 0.25 1.33 0.13 0.67 2.27 10.67 1.17 3.67 9.03 16.00 3.36 14.00 13.79 34.00 1.89 4.00 0.34 0.67 0.52 1.67 12.36 37.00 0.25 1.00 0.12 0.67 0.59 1.33 0.10 0.67 0.44 5.67 0.02 0.33 1.77 3.67 0.17 1.33 0.33 1.33 0.57 2.33 0.13 1.67 0.17 0.33 0.83 2.67 0.04 0.67 0.57 2.00 0.91 3.00 0.11 1.67 0.39 1.33 0.45 2.00 0.29 1.00 0.32 1.33 0.46 1.67 1.33 4.00 1.24 3.67 0.11 1.00 0.59 2.33 0.98 3.33 B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 61 Table 2 continued SAG stage Lithologic types Constituents Paragnetic relation Sphalerite Replacing primary constituent Replacing diagenetic constituent Filling secondary dissolution porosity Replacing primary constituent Replacing syngenetic constituent Replacing diagenetic constituent Filling secondary dissolution porosity Filling secondary dissolution porosity Filling secondary dissolution porosity Filling fracture porosity Filling secondary dissolution porosity Primary Between syngenetic constituents Svanbergite Zeolite Rutile Bitumen Interparticle porosity Growth-framework porosity Primary porosity total Mg-clay dissolution porosity Intercrystalline porosity Intra-crystalline aggregate porosity Intraparticle porosity Moldic porosity Vug porosity Secondary dissolution porosity total Fracture porosity total Total porosity primary, secondary and fracture Syngenetic constituent dissolution Primary constituent dissolution Diagenetic constituent dissolution Primary constituent dissolution Diagenetic constituent dissolution Primary constituent dissolution Primary constituent dissolution Primary constituent dissolution Primary constituent fracture Fascicular calcite crusts Claystones with calcite spherulites 0.27 1.33 0.42 2.33 0.59 1.67 Intraclastic rudstones Dolostones 0.68 2.00 0.38 2.33 0.52 2.67 0.42 1.00 0.19 1.33 0.94 2.33 0.72 1.67 0.86 2.67 0.43 1.67 0.31 1.33 0.73 2.67 0.27 2.00 0.29 2.33 0.44 1.67 0.17 0.67 0.13 0.67 0.25 1.00 0.38 1.33 0.11 1.33 0.51 1.67 0.42 1.67 1.87 6.00 0.55 1.33 0.42 0.80 2.33 0.52 1.67 1.87 0.34 1.67 0.55 0.11 1.33 1.30 3.67 1.14 2.67 4.77 9.67 0.71 3.00 1.03 2.33 5.19 15.00 1.19 3.67 0.27 3.00 0.60 3.33 0.63 2.33 0.17 0.67 0.22 0.67 0.33 1.33 0.51 1.67 2.27 7.00 5.11 0.48 1.33 1.20 2.33 3.50 1.60 4.67 1.47 4.00 1.87 4.33 10.04 3.31 6.00 0.72 3.00 2.32 5.67 8.31 1.86 6.33 3.24 7.00 11.81 1.64 7.00 3.02 0.44 5.98 2.83 6.33 11.90 0.17 9.03 0.43 12.24 1.24 4.26 as the amounts of intra-particle and moldic porosity generated by their dissolution. The bioclasts are heterogeneously replaced by dolomite, microcrystalline silica, quartz, chalcedony, and sulfides. In some bioclastic grainstones and rudstones, coarse-crystalline saddle dolomite, calcite, Sr-barite, and celestine fill preferentially inter- and intraparticle, moldic, vugular, and fracture porosity Fig. 3F . Silica phases are very common in the rift section 45.8 of the described samples , where they mainly replace the bioclasts, which may be partially to intensely silicified. Quartz occurs preferentially as prismatic rims and as a coarse mosaic of crystals within inter- and intraparticle porosity Fig. 3C, F . 4.1.2. Stevensitic ooidal arenites Another lithologic type characteristic of the rift section is arenites constituted by ooids of syngenetic magnesian layer silicates mostly stevensite see Supplementary material Fig. 3D . The rift stevensitic ooidal arenites present a massive to slightly laminated structure with good to moderate sorting and stevensite ooids in sizes ranging between 0.3 and 1.7 mm, with a mode of 0.7 mm. As described by Herlinger Jr. et al. 2017 , the stevensitic ooidal arenites occurring at the top of the rift section of the northern Campos Basin are usually deformed, fractured, dissolved, and replaced by silica, calcite, dolomite and quartz. The stevensitic ooids were partially to totally replaced by blocky or mosaic calcite and dolomite, prismatic and mosaic quartz, fibrous chalcedony, microcrystalline silica Fig. 3D , pyrite, and svanbergite. The interparticle, intraparticle, intercrystalline, moldic Fig. 3E , vugular, Laminites Intraclastic grainstones Cherts channel, and fracture porosity are generally filled by calcite as fibrous and microcrystalline rims, botryoidal, fine- to coarse-crystalline, and mosaic to drusy, as well as by silica, chalcedony, quartz and dolomite Table 1 . Silica and blocky and or mosaic dolomite selectively replaced the peloids partially to totally. 4.1.3. Dolostones Dolostones correspond to 15.9 of the samples described in the rift interval. However, some dolomitization was observed in 59.7 of the analyzed rift samples, varying from incipient to very intense. Some degree of fracturing was identified in 14.3 of the dolostone samples. The crystal sizes in the rift dolostones range between 0.01 very fine crystallinity and 1.57 mm medium crystallinity , with a modal size of 0.16 mm. The protolith was recognizable in 24.1 of the rift dolostones. Of these, 57.1 correspond to bioclastic rudstones, 14.3 to grainstones and 28.6 to stevensitic ooidal arenites Fig. 3E . Pore types in the rift dolostones are exclusively secondary, of intercrystalline, intracrystalline, moldic, vugular, channel, and fracture types. The main diagenetic phases that replace primary and diagenetic constituents and fill the porosity are mosaic calcite, blocky and saddle dolomite Fig. 3F , quartz prismatic rims to drusiform, fibro-radiated and rims chalcedony, and silica. Secondary constituents were svanbergite, Sr-barite, celestine, euhedral to subhedral sulfides pyrite, chalcopyrite and galena , and bitumen Table 1 . Another important diagenetic feature that was observed in some of the analyzed samples from the Macabu and Coqueiros Formations is the presence of stylolites, some of them had 62 B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 dissolution halos 10.2 of the samples and occur frequently associated with dolomitized intervals and residual concentrations of pyrite. 4.2. Sag phase lithofacies The main lithologic types recognized in the sag section Macabu Formation are fascicular calcite crusts, stevensitic claystones with calcite spherulites see Supplementary material , intraclastic rudstones and grainstones, laminites, dolostones, and cherts. Table 2 shows the average and maximum amounts of the main primary detrital, syngenetic, and chemically precipitated and diagenetic constituents, as well as the pore types in each of these lithologic types that were analyzed in the Macabu Formation. Primary porosity in the fascicular calcite crusts is essentially of the growth-framework inter-crystalline aggregate type Table 2 . Secondary porosity is notably dominant in the analyzed sag rocks, accounting for 95.9 of total petrographic porosity on average. The matrix dissolution, laminar, intraparticle, intercrystalline, moldic, vugular, intra-crystalline aggregate, and fracture secondary porosity were identified. The lithologic types with a higher average petrographic porosity are dolostones and intraclastic grainstones and rudstones, followed by spherulitic rocks, fascicular calcite crusts, and cherts. The fracture porosity is relatively more important in spherulitic rocks and cherts, and secondarily in fascicular calcite crusts, dolostones, and intraclastic rudstones Table 2 . 4.2.1. Fascicular calcite crusts Laminations in the studied fascicular calcite crusts range in thickness from 0.4 to 5.2 mm, with a mode of 1.8 mm Fig. 4A, B . Such crusts are intercalated with discontinuous levels formed by laminations, peloids and clay ooids and siliciclastic grains, such as muscovite and quartz, which were partially to totally replaced by dolomite, calcite, microquartz, chalcedony, and pyrite. The clay peloids that were partially replaced by calcite or silica also commonly appear included in the fascicular aggregates. Approximately 16 of the analyzed crusts show good preservation of the original fascicular habitat Fig. 4C . The remainder present different types of recrystallization in sectors, in mosaic, with and without preservation of optical orientation dolomitization microcrystalline, blocky and saddle dolomite and silicification microcrystalline silica, chalcedony spherulites, and blocky, mosaic, and prismatic quartz Table 2 . In the fascicular calcite crusts, the pore types that occur are primary growth-framework, inter-crystalline aggregates and secondary Mg-clay dissolution, intercrystalline and intra-crystalline aggregates, vugular, and fracture . The most common diagenetic phases that replace preexisting constituents and fill the porosity in calcite crusts are blocky, baroque and saddle dolomite fine-to-thick mosaic and prismatic rims calcite flamboyant, prismatic rims to drusiform quartz and silica Fig. 5A . Fibrous, fibro-radiated and spherulitic chalcedony microcrystalline, pseudocubic svanbergite Fig. 5A sulfates sulfides and magnesite occur in a subordinate amount Table 2 . Furthermore, dolomite, lamellar, pseudomorphic magnesite and microcrystalline silica also commonly occur in replacing the stevensite laminations. However, macrocrystalline quartz and calcite Figs. 5C, D, 6 radiated and oriented Sr-barite and celestine Fig. 5B, C, D prismatic sphalerite Fig. 5E, F , pyrite, chalcopyrite and galena Fig. 6E, F fibro-radiated zeolite Fig. 6C, D chlorite rutile and massive bitumen with shrinkage cracks were only found filling the growth framework, Mg-clay dissolution, intercrystalline, intra-crystalline aggregate, vugular, and fracture porosity Table 2 Fig. 7 . Prior to the precipitation of saddle dolomite, quartz, calcite, sulfates, sulfides, zeolite, rutile, and bitumen, important fracturing and dissolution events occurred, which largely modified the pre-existing pore systems Fig. 7B, C, E, F . In many samples, the saddle dolomite dissolution occurs preferably on the inside of the crystals, thereby creating important intracrystalline porosity Fig. 7A . Euhedral to subhedral, 0.05 to 5 mm crystals of Sr-barite, celestine, pyrite, sphalerite, chalcopyrite and galena occur filling vugular pores and fractures, often with a poikilotopic texture replacing and engulfing dolomite, calcite and quartz Fig. 7F . Paragenetic relationships with macrocrystalline calcite, quartz and sphalerite, and radiated chalcedony partially engulf and replace saddle dolomite and Sr-barite. The SrO content in the analyzed Sr-barite ranges from 2 to 16 , with an average of 6.7 WDS analysis . Aggregates of microcrystalline rutile were identified filling vugular and fracture porosity, which were associated with native copper Cu and zinc Zn Fig. 7E . Solid bitumen commonly occurs partially filling the secondary porosity, which generally represents the last phase of this paragenesis Fig. 7B . In addition, fluorite and dickite have also been described in other wells of the study area Herlinger Jr. et al., 2017 , and dawsonite was identified in the XRD analysis see Supplementary material . 4.2.2. Stevensitic claystones with calcite spherulites The syngenetic laminated deposits constituted by magnesian layer silicate phases, probably of stevensitic original composition, with some kerolite Supplementary material Figs. 4D, E, F, 8A, B , form a significant part of the Aptian Macabu Formation. Commonly, only a small proportion of the Mg-clays is preserved in the thin sections, making their recognition very difficult. Mg-clay deposits were widely dissolved and or replaced by dolomite, microcrystalline silica, chalcedony, quartz, pyrite and svanbergite Table 2 . The pseudomorphic replacement of stevensite by magnesite is also very common. In addition, a pyritization process of the portion that was originally composed of the stevensite clay matrix was also verified. Calcite spherulites, which were characterized as approximately symmetrical fibro-radiated aggregates Hodgson, 1968 Schroeder, 1972 Chafetz and Butler, 1980 Verrecchia et al., 1995 , occur conspicuously replacing and displacing the irregularly laminated Mg-clay deposits Fig. 4E, F . The diameter of calcite spherulites range between 0.2 and 2.7 mm, with a mode of 0.9 mm Fig. 8A, B . Some spherulites present nuclei formed by ostracod bioclasts or clay peloids. Transitional forms between spherulitic and fascicular aggregates were found in many samples, including asymmetrical spherulites, vertically elongated spherulites with lobate borders, hemispherulites, and single or multiple fascicular aggregates nucleated on spherulites. Another relevant aspect of the analyzed samples is the very good preservation of the fibrous habit of original calcite crystals in many of the fascicular calcite crusts and calcite spherulites Fig. 8A, B , which are currently composed of non-magnesian calcite. Partially to totally dolomitized and silicified calcite spherulites with the Mg-clay matrix mimetically replaced by dolomite commonly occur Figs. 4E, F, 8A, B . Pore types in the spherulitic rocks are only secondary and occur from matrix dissolution, inter- and intra-crystalline aggregates, intraparticle, vugular Fig. 7C , and fracture. Stevensitic claystones replaced by calcite spherulites and dolomite commonly present low porosity, but locally abundant secondary pores were generated by stevensite dissolution. The typical diagenetic phases that replace primary and diagenetic constituents as cement filling porosity in spherulitic rocks are blocky, baroque and saddle dolomite calcite as bladed crystals and fine-tocoarse mosaic quartz as prismatic rims fibrous and spherulitic chalcedony and silica. Secondarily by svanbergite, sulfates, sulfides, magnesite, and bitumen Table 2 . 4.2.3. Laminites The Aptian laminites sag section analyzed in this study present a range of lamination types with thicknesses varying usually from millimeter to centimeter, and with shapes varying from simple planar to wavy Fig. 8C, D , as described by Coniglio et al. 2004 for laminites of the Upper Silurian in the Michigan Basin. Most laminated deposits are characterized by thin horizontal to sub-horizontal, mostly isopachous laminations that range from regular to discontinuous and that are commonly crenulated. The apparently crenulated contacts observed in some B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 63 Fig. 4. Photomicrographs highlighting main features in syngenetic and diagenetic constituents of the sag section. A and B Fascicular-optic calcite crusts CFC intercalated with granular deposits replaced by dolomite Dol crossed polarizers XP C Divergent calcite crystal aggregates with fascicular-optic texture XP D Stevensite laminations SL replaced and displaced by blocky dolomite BD uncrossed polarizers P E Calcite spherulites in the laminated Mg-clay matrix SL replaced by dolomite XP F Partially silicified calcite spherulites CS , displacing and replacing Mg-clay laminations SL XP . laminites could indicate a possible microbial origin but under petrographic observation are revealed to correspond to microstylolites. The most abundant constituents of the laminites are calcite and dolomite Table 2 . Detailed observations reveal that most laminites correspond originally to laminated clays deposits, probably stevensitic, which were extensively replaced by calcite or dolomite Fig. 8D . Remnants of the original clays are marked by organic matter and siliciclastic grains quartz, biotite and muscovite . Other levels are intensely silicified, exhibit secondary dissolution porosity, and are partially filled by carbonate and siliceous cements. Replacement by calcite, dolomitization and silicification range from complete to selective alteration of individual laminae. Sparse calcite spherulites and nodular structures that are asymmetrical and often coalesced occur commonly. The most common diagenetic phases replacing primary and diagenetic constituents in the laminites are microcrystalline, blocky and fine mosaic calcite and dolomite microcrystalline silica fibrous 64 B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 Fig. 5. Petrographic features of svanbergite, Sr-barite, and sphalerite. A Microcrystalline pseudocubic svanbergite Sv crystals immersed in chert constituted by microcrystalline silica P B Prismatic, elongated and oriented celestine Ce crystals filling fracture porosity and partially replacing dolomite in dolostone XP C Radiated Sr-barite SB and macrocrystalline calcite MC stained red filling vugular pore XP D Elongated prismatic Sr-barite SB and euhedral macrocrystalline calcite MC partially filling the vugular porosity BSE E Macrocrystalline, partially dissolved sphalerite Sp and rhombohedral dolomite RD partially filling the vugular pore P F Macrocrystalline sphalerite Sp engulfing and replacing dolomite blue arrows and partially filling vugular porosity BSE . For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. chalcedony and quartz. Blocky, framboidal and microcrystalline pyrite and radiated Sr-barite also occur in smaller amounts Table 2 . The porosity of the laminites is very low, and the pores are secondary, from matrix dissolution, with minor laminar pores, intercrystalline among blocky dolomite or quartz, and microfractures that are partially filled by blocky to mosaic calcite, dolomite and quartz. Stylolites and relatively well preserved ostracods are also common. 4.2.4. Intraclastic grainstones and rudstones The constituents of intraclastic grainstones and rudstones Fig. 8E, F, respectively are mainly fragments of reworked calcite crusts, calcite spherulites, Mg-clay laminated aggregates, and laminated carbonates. Massive to stratified intraclastic grainstones and rudstones that are locally slightly compacted and cemented may show good porosity and permeability. The intraclast grain size varies between 0.06 and B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 65 Fig. 6. Aspects of macrocrystalline calcite, zeolite and sulfides. A Twinned macrocrystalline calcite MC completely filling vugular porosity in fascicular calcite crust FC XP B Drusiform macrocrystalline calcite MC partially cementing the vugular pore in chert. Secondary electrons microscopy SEM image C Fibro-radiated zeolite Ze and euhedral macrocrystalline calcite MC stained red filling the vugular porosity in intensely recrystallized and dolomitized intraclastic grainstone P D Fibro-radiated zeolite Ze and euhedral macrocrystalline calcite MC filling partially vugular pores in chert BSE E and F Euhedral sulfides Su mostly pyrite, secondarily chalcopyrite and galena , lamellar Sr-barite SB , macrocrystalline calcite MC and prismatic macroquartz MQ filling vugular and fracture porosity in chert XP and BSE, respectively . For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. 4.1 mm, with a modal size of 0.8 mm. According to Herlinger Jr. et al. 2017 , some intraclastic rocks contain a redeposited clay matrix and, therefore, should be considered hybrid rocks. The main pore types in intraclastic grainstones and rudstones are primary interparticle and secondary from the dissolution of Mg-clay matrix, intercrystalline, intraparticle, moldic, vugular, and fracture. The diagenetic phases that commonly replace preexisting constituents and fill the porosity in intraclastic rocks are calcite as mosaic aggregates and prismatic rims, blocky and saddle dolomite, prismatic rims to drusiform quartz, spherulitic chalcedony, and silica. Svanbergite, sulfates, sulfides, fibro-radiated zeolite Fig. 6C , and bitumen are less common Table 2 . The analyzed zeolite has 8.9 K 2O, 0.7 CaO, 0.4 F, 0.3 SrO, and 0.1 BaO WDS analysis . Compaction was intense along the interparticle contacts, both through mechanical grain fracturing and deformation and chemical pressure dissolution processes. 66 B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 Fig. 7. Examples of pores and cements in the studied samples. A Intracrystalline porosity in zoned saddle dolomite SD filling growth-framework porosity in fascicular calcite crust FC XP B Bitumen black , macrocrystalline calcite MC and dolomite red arrows partially filling the vugular porosity blue in chert P C Vugular porosity partially cemented by macrocrystalline quartz MQ , partially silicified rhombohedral dolomite blue arrows and calcite spherulites CS stained red P D Detail of intracrystalline porosity in partially preserved dolomite rhomb DR intensely replaced by microcrystalline silica MS and macrocrystalline quartz MQ BSE E Fracture porosity partially filled by euhedral macrocrystalline quartz MQ , chalcedony rims ChR and microcrystalline rutile green arrows in chert constituted by microcrystalline silica MS and chalcedony spherulites ChS P F Vugular porosity completely cemented by microcrystalline silica MS , flamboyant quartz FQ , opaque sulfides Su pyrite, chalcopyrite and galena , radiated Sr-barite SB , and macrocrystalline calcite MC XP . For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. 4.2.5. Dolostones Dolostones represent 11.5 of the samples described in the sag section Fig. 9 . However, some dolomitization was observed in 69.1 of the analyzed sag samples, varying from incipient to very intense. In 14.3 of the dolostone samples, some intensity of fracturing was identified. The main diagenetic phases replacing preexisting constituents and filling porosity in the sag dolostones are microcrystalline, blocky Fig. 9A, B, D , fine mosaic and saddle Fig. 9C, E, F dolomite mosaic calcite fibrous and laminated to botryoidal chalcedony drusiform quartz and silica Fig. 9B, F . Secondarily, they are replaced by Sr-barite, celestine, sulfides, svanbergite, and bitumen Table 2 . These phases fill intra-crystalline aggregate, clay matrix B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 67 Fig. 8. Main features in diagenetic, detrital, and pore constituents in sag lithologic types. A Calcite spherulites in the Mg-clay matrix replaced by microcrystalline dolomite XP B Partially dolomitized calcite spherulites CS with stevensite replaced by dolomite XP C Planar to wavy laminite with millimetric laminations defined by the predominance of clay and of microcrystalline dolomite P D Dolomite extensively replacing the original Mg-clay matrix in laminite P E Intraclastic grainstone with well-preserved interparticle porosity blue P F Intraclastic rudstone with interparticle porosity partially cemented by calcite and dolomite P . For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. dissolution, laminar, intercrystalline, moldic, vugular, and fracture secondary porosity Fig. 9 . The crystal sizes in the sag dolostones range between 0.01 very fine crystallinity and 3.27 mm medium crystallinity , with a modal size of 0.09 mm. Dolomite with microcrystalline and blocky habits partially and heterogeneously replaced the Mg-clay matrix, as well as the calcite spherulites and fascicular aggregates Fig. 10 . In many samples, dolomite selectively replaced the stevensitic sediments, while the calcite aggregates are only marginally dolomitized Fig. 10C . The original deposits that were modified by dolomitization and silicification processes were difficult, if not impossible, to recognize. In some partially dolomitized rocks, dolomitization occurred only at the edges of fascicular and spherulitic calcite, appearing as microcrystalline dolomite that partially followed the divergent optical calcite orientation Fig. 11A . Dolomite with orange cathodoluminescence CL patterns replaced the Mg-clay sediments, as well as the fascicular and spherulitic calcite 68 B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 Fig. 9. Aspects of dolomite in sag dolostones and other strata affected by dolomitization. A Dolostone with blocky dolomite BD and intercrystalline porosity blue XP B Dolomite rhombs DR in rock intensely replaced by microcrystalline silica MS XP C Partially dissolved saddle dolomite SD crystals filling the vugular pore XP D Dolomite rhombohedra with well-developed zonation defined by fluid inclusions, cementing fracture porosity backscattered electrons image, BSE . Note the selective dissolution in the center of the dolomite rhombs E Dolostone composed of baroque dolomite BaD replacing non-selectively clays and other constituents, and filling vugular porosity XP . Remnants of brown magnesian clay blue arrows among baroque dolomite aggregates F Zoned saddle dolomite SD filling vugular porosity in silicified intraclastic rudstone XP . For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. aggregates red CL Fig. 11A . In addition, dolomite rhombohedra occur partially filling inter-aggregate pores in the fascicular crusts and those formed by the dissolution of the syngenetic Mg-clay matrix. Such dissolution generated the laminar and vugular porosity that were observed in part of the sag samples. Magnesite occurs in some samples, pseudomorphically replacing part of the stevensitic matrix laminations EDS, WDS and XRD analyses Supplementary material . 4.2.6. Cherts Totally silicified rocks cherts were only observed in the sag section, corresponding to 27.4 of the described sag samples Fig. 12 . These rocks are constituted by microcrystalline and macrocrystalline silica, quartz as prismatic rims and mosaics, and chalcedony as fibrous rims and spherulitic aggregates, which partially to fully replaced the pre-existing constituents and filled secondary pores Table 2 . In the B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 69 Fig. 10. QEMSCAN images showing structural, textural, and fabric features that are characteristic of the analyzed sag deposits. A Spherulitic rock intensely dolomitized dark-blue and partially silicified yellow with minor sphalerite gray indicated by red arrows filling the matrix-dissolution porosity B Dolostone dark-blue partially silicified yellow with macrocrystalline calcite light-blue and Sr-barite purple indicated by orange arrows partially filling vugular and fracture porosity C Coalescent crust of fascicular calcite and calcite spherulites light-blue partially dolomitized dark-blue and silicified yellow D Intraclastic rudstone with incipient dolomitization dark-blue and strong silicification yellow preferentially affecting the interstitial spaces and edges of calcite intraclasts light-blue E Chert with fractures and vugular pores filled by hydrothermal mineral phases macroquartz yellow , calcite light-blue , Sr-barite purple , and pyrite brown F Sr-barite and celestine purple filling the fractures and replacing the pre-existing constituents in strongly brecciated, silicified and dolomitized argillaceous rock. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. 70 B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 Fig. 11. Cathodoluminescence images of relevant aspects of the examined lithologic types and mineral phases. A Partially dolomitized D coalescent crusts of fascicular calcite CFC and calcite spherulites CS B Intensely silicified black and dolomitized red deposit with dolomite rhombs RD , microcrystalline silica MS and svanbergite light blue . Note the dolomite rhombs partially replaced by microcrystalline silica green arrows C Complexly zoned saddle dolomite crystals SD partially surrounded and replaced by microcrystalline silica MS D Zoned saddle dolomite SD and mosaic calcite MC filling vugular porosity E Sr-barite SB , and zoned saddle dolomite SD and macrocrystalline calcite MC filling vugular porosity F Fracture in chert, completely filled with zoned macrocrystalline mosaic calcite MC and quartz MQ , radiated Sr-barite SB , and sulfides S . For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. microcrystalline siliceous phases, moganite, tridymite, and cristobalite are associated with quartz and chalcedony, as verified in the XRD analyses. Crystal sizes within the cherts vary between 0.01 and 2.94 mm, with a mode of 0.11 mm. Microcrystalline and blocky dolomite is very common Fig. 12B , replacing primary, syngenetic, and diagenetic constituents, such as Mg-clay deposits, intraclasts, and calcite crusts and spherulites, which commonly representing relicts from previous dolomitization. Diagenetic phases replacing preexisting constituents in sag cherts include microcrystalline silica Fig. 12A, B, C, E , micro to macrocrystalline quartz Fig. 12D, E, F , fibrous and spherulitic chalcedony Fig. 12B, C, E, F , mosaic calcite Fig. 12D , and blocky and saddle dolomite Fig. 12B, F . Subordinately, they were replaced by svanbergite, prismatic Sr-barite and celestine Fig. 12D , fibroradiated zeolite Fig. 6D , and blocky sulfides pyrite, chalcopyrite and galena Figs. 6E, F, 7F, 11F . Svanbergite is relatively common B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 71 Fig. 12. Main aspects of diagenetic silica in cherts and partially silicified rocks. A Calcite spherulites CS stained red partially replaced by microcrystalline MS and cryptocrystalline silica CrS XP . Note that the silicification affected mostly the edges of the spherulites B Dolostone constituted by blocky dolomite BD partially replaced by microcrystalline silica MS and chalcedony spherulites ChS XPL C Microcrystalline silica MS and chalcedony spherulites ChS totally replacing the preexisting constituents and cementing the vugular pores in chert XP D Radial prismatic quartz PQ , Sr-barite SB and macrocrystalline calcite MC filling vugular porosity XP E Drusiform quartz DQ and spherulitic chalcedony ChS cementing vugular porosity in protolith totally replaced by microcrystalline silica MS XP F Zoned saddle dolomite intensely silicified SSD , macrocrystalline quartz MQ , and spherulitic chalcedony ChS completely filling the vugular pore XP . For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. and occurs as pseudocubic crystals varying from 1 to 100 m Fig. 5A , always disseminated in microcrystalline silica or within chalcedony spherulites, mainly where silicification affected clay-rich protoliths. WDS analyses of svanbergite yielded in average 19.4 mass of SrO, 29.6 Al2O3, 0.2 Ce2O3, 0.1 CaO, 0.1 MgO, 0.1 La2O3, 0.1 FeO, and 0.1 BaO. Secondary pore types are mainly intercrystalline and intracrystalline aggregate. Intense fracturing and dissolution subsequent to silicification was responsible for an extensive, yet heterogeneous, formation of fracture and vugular porosity. Many vugs and fractures are partially to completely filled by microcrystalline silica quartz as coarse mosaic, flamboyant and prismatic rims to drusiform fibro-radiated and 72 B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 spherulitic chalcedony calcite as coarse mosaic blocky and saddle dolomite sulfates sulfides svanbergite rutile and bitumen Table 2 . Some fractures filled by prismatic quartz are often cut by others that are partially filled by macrocrystalline calcite Fig. 10E . Most of the observed silicification clearly occurred subsequent to dolomitization, as indicated by remnants of dolomitized constituents that are preserved within the silicified areas Fig. 10 . Some samples show pervasive silicification of dolomitized intraclasts and fascicular and spherulitic aggregates Fig. 10C, D . At this stage, it is possible to identify only scarce remnants of dolomitized primary constituents Fig. 10E . The syngenetic clay matrix remains were preferentially silicified in relation to the calcite spherulitic and fascicular aggregates. Quartz and chalcedony spherulites partially to fully replace preexisting constituents and fill growth framework, intra-crystalline aggregate, laminar, and vugular porosity. Commonly, dolomite rhombohedra with red CL present partial silicification along their edges Fig. 11B . Small 2 to 20 m svanbergite crystals with light blue CL occur preferentially disseminated within microcrystalline quartz Fig. 11B . 5. Discussion 5.1. Syngenetic Mg silicates The occurrence of syngenetic magnesian clay minerals is reported in several alkaline and saline lakes e.g., Bradley and Fahey, 1962 Tettenhorst and Moore, 1978 Darragi and Tardy, 1987 Calvo et al., 1999 Cuevas et al., 2003 Pozo and Gala n, 2015 . The predominant Mg layer silicates occurring in the Pre-Salt succession are kerolite, a hydrated form of talc, and mostly stevensite, which is a smectite Bertani and Carozzi, 1985a, 1985b Tosca and Wright, 2014 Sabato Ceraldi and Green, 2016 . The widespread precipitation of stevensite indicates that the Pre-Salt lacustrine environments of the Campos and Santos Basins presented high alkalinity pH 10 , high concentrations of silica and magnesium, and low pCO2 Tosca and Masterson, 2014 Tosca and Wright, 2014, 2015 . The commonly very fine and silky microfabric and the wavy laminations of these magnesian clay phases in the Aptian deposits Fig. 3 suggest precipitation as a cryptocrystalline, with perhaps even a colloidal syngenetic phase, possibly as a poorly crystalline hydrated Mg-silicate gel Tosca and Wright, 2014 . The laminated stevensitic deposits were probably deposited in low-energy environments, while the ooids are likely to have been formed under some agitation caused by waves or currents, with peloids probably deposited in intermediate energy conditions Armelenti et al., 2016 Herlinger Jr. et al., 2017 . Fine-grained deposits of stevensite and other Mg silicates occur throughout the whole Aptian Pre-Salt succession, and their recurrent and widespread distribution indicates that they constituted the background of sedimentation in the wide, hyper-alkaline sag lakes. The salinity of the fluid is an important factor in Mg-clay precipitation Pozo and Calvo, 2018 . The Mg-clay deposits were commonly dissolved, and or replaced by silica, calcite, dolomite or magnesite. The widespread dissolution of Mg-clays in the Pre-Salt deposits probably occurred under eodiagenetic conditions related to the low stability and fast dissolution kinetics of stevensite in a scenario of high pCO2, with a pH below 8 Tosca and Wright, 2015 . The dissolution of stevensite and other Mg silicates may have occurred either by the influx of CO2 related to magmatic and or hydrothermal activity or by the dilution of lacustrine waters owing to relatively more humid climatic conditions e.g., Renaut et al., 1986 De Wet et al., 2002 . 5.2. Syngenetic and eodiagenetic calcite The main Pre-Salt Aptian reservoirs commonly correspond to crusts made of coalescent aggregates of divergent fibrous fascicularoptic sensu Kendall, 1977 calcite with predominantly vertical and shrub-like growth, which are similar to abiotic stromatolites Grotzinger and Knoll, 1999 Riding, 2008 and abiotic travertines ray-crystal shrubs sensu Chafetz and Guidry, 1999 Fig. 4A, B, C . According to Chafetz and Guidry 1999 , the ray-crystal shrubs that are characteristic of some travertines, which are similar to those observed in the crusts of fascicular calcite of the sag deposits, are a product of chemical, abiotic precipitation related to CO 2 loss and evaporation. Likewise, Riding 2008 characterized the stromatolites formed by fibrous aggregates, such as those of the Pre-Salt interval, as a product of abiotic precipitation. These deposits could be identified as a coarse-crystalline, equant spar or radial-fibrous calcite. The syngenetic magnesian clays deposits, with a subordinate amount of siliciclastic mud, constituted the substrate on and within calcite crusts and spherulites that were chemically precipitated Fig. 13 . The interruption and deformation of the stevensite laminations indicate that the Pre-Salt calcite spherulites were formed within these finegrained deposits, replacing and displacing the clay laminations during eodiagenesis Wright and Barnett, 2015 Figs. 4E, F, 13B , and not, as suggested by Chafetz et al. 2018 around bacterial colonies and or their bioproducts, probably while afloat in a lacustrine water column before settling to the water-sediment interface . The displacement is not linked to compaction, because the calcite spherulites between the stevensitic matrix laminations did not present features such as grain fracturing and or deformation. Therefore, the calcite spherulites were formed as concretions, replacing and or displacing fine-grained deposits constituted by syngenetic magnesian silicates and minor extrabasinal siliciclastic mud Fig. 13B . Larger and asymmetric spherulites formed closer to the water-sediment interface WSI , and at a greater relative distance, smaller and symmetrical growth of spherulites took place. The distinction between spherulitic and fascicular growth forms was probably defined by the higher ionic supply and rate of precipitation for the latter, as well as by the availability of free space for vertical growth Grotzinger and Knoll, 1999 Wright and Barnett, 2014 Wright and Tosca, 2016 . The fascicular calcite crusts are syngenetic precipitates that formed directly on the WSI Fig. 13C, D . Their irregular stratification is related to the intercalation of levels of crystalline calcite with a finer texture, or mostly of fine-grained syngenetic Mg silicates and terrigenous sediments. The continuous fibrous crystalline fabric of the fascicular crusts characteristic of the main reservoirs of the Aptian Pre-Salt succession has been interpreted in Archean and Paleoproterozoic stromatolites Grotzinger and Knoll, 1999 Riding, 2008 and in travertines Chafetz and Guidry, 1999 as being a product of chemical, abiotic precipitation Wright and Barnett, 2015 Herlinger Jr. et al., 2017 . This interpretation differs from the processes of mineralization, encrustation or sediment trapping and binding by benthic microbial communities Burne and Moore, 1987 Riding, 2000 . Therefore, the name microbialite should not be used for those reservoirs. The intense and extensive precipitation of thick and laterally coalescent fascicular calcite crusts was probably associated with changes in the lake water chemistry related to increased runoff during less arid periods, and or with CO2 input by magmatic and hydrothermal activity. The irregular stratification of the deposits was probably related to the interruption or decrease of calcite precipitation, thus promoting the intercalation with microcrystalline calcite aggregates or with fine-grained stevensitic or terrigenous mud deposits. The high frequency of these cycles throughout the succession would imply that the alternated precipitation of stevensite or calcite could not be promoted by large-scale changes in the chemistry of the huge sag lakes, but rather in local conditions, which are potentially related to patterns of circulation and or stratification of the lake waters. The Mg-matrix is later dissolved and preserves only syngenetic and eodiagenetic constituents, fascicular calcite and spherulitic aggregates, and generates secondary porosity Wright and Barnett, 2017 Herlinger Jr. et al., 2017 . B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 73 Fig. 13. Schematic representation of the genesis of typical Aptian Pre-salt deposits. A Laminated deposits of syngenetic magnesian clays, with dispersed clay peloids and siliciclastic grains B Partial replacement and deformation of the Mg-clay matrix by calcite spherulites. Asymmetrical spherulites formed closer to the water-sediment interface WSI C Non-coalesced fascicular aggregates of calcite precipitated on WSI with inter-aggregate growth-framework porosity. Clay peloids and siliciclastic grains included in some fascicular aggregates D Characteristic cycle showing the syngenetic crust of coalesced fascicular calcite aggregates at the top, and syngenetic Mg-clay matrix partially replaced and displaced by calcite spherulites in the middle and preserved at the base. 5.3. Diagenetic and or hydrothermal processes and products According to Machel and Lonnee 2002 , the term hydrothermal dolomite is confusing and difficult to apply. Hydrothermal convection that is capable of producing a pervasive dolomitization on a regional scale would be hydrologically impossible. For these same authors, it is possible to verify the existence of dolomitic deposits that are associated with hydrothermal activity related to faulting. The focused flow of 74 B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 hydrothermal fluids through fault zones and or unconformities could locally modify the reservoir quality Jones and Xiao, 2013 . However, the distinction of a hydrothermal mineral would only be possible if one considers its temperature of formation relative to the temperature of the surrounding rocks at the time of mineral formation. The characteristics that are most commonly cited in the literature to define hydrothermal alteration in carbonate deposits are fluid temperatures higher than those of the host rocks fluids directly or indirectly related to magmatic processes, with or without the introduction of juvenile water fluid flow carried through fault and fracture systems and local precipitation of exotic mineral assemblages with diverse compositions relative to the host rocks. However, it should be noted that several of these are not exclusive and that the characteristics mentioned above may be impractical to apply, such as a measurement of temperature higher than that of the host rocks. The processes of physicochemical alteration have certain determinant factors, such as the pH, temperature, and the composition of fluids that are rich in gases and ions. Davies and Smith 2006 defined hydrothermal dolomitization as a process that occurs along structural lineaments under burial conditions, commonly at shallow depths, and that is related to hypersaline fluids with temperatures and pressures higher than those occurring in the host carbonate formation. According to Packard et al. 2001 , some types of dolomite occurring in the Wabamun Group Upper Devonian in Parkland Field, Canada, exhibit a wide variety of crystallinity and microfabrics and are interpreted as products of hydrothermal dolomitization. Saddle dolomite occurs both as replacement for the original carbonate rock as well as by cement filling the secondary porosity. Dolomite deposits would be the result of recrystallization under the strong influence of successive fluids and formed during relatively short periods of intense hydrothermal activity. The porosity and permeability in host carbonate facies control the lateral extension of peripheral flow. Thus, the distribution and geometry of depositional and eodiagenetic facies of the host carbonates are critical for the lateral extension of hydrothermal dolomitization, as well as for the types, volume, and distribution of porosity Xu et al., 2015 . Many of the Pre-Salt samples that were analyzed in the study area were strongly affected by fracturing, dissolution, recrystallization, pervasive dolomitization and silicification, and the precipitation of calcite, dolomite, quartz, chalcedony, Sr-barite, celestine, pyrite, chalcopyrite, galena, sphalerite, zeolite, and bitumen, mainly filling secondary porosity. This unusual mineral assembly is totally incompatible with the Pre-Salt carbonate host rock, which indicates that its precipitation occurred from hydrothermal fluids. Despite the relatively low-average percentages, hydrothermal phases are present in most rift and sag samples Tables 1, 2 . Both in lithologic types dolostones and cherts, as in intensely dolomitized and silicified samples, the mean values are slightly higher, which reveals their intrinsic relationship with hydrothermal dolomitization and silicification. In many situations, recrystallization almost totally obscured the original fibrous fabric of the fascicular or spherulitic aggregates, which were transformed into a mosaic of anhedral calcite crystals. The partial replacement of the Mg-clay matrix, calcite spherulites, and fascicular aggregates by microcrystalline and blocky dolomite and magnesite is possibly the result of eodiagenetic and or mesodiagenetic processes and occurs clearly prior to silicification Figs. 4, 8, 10C, 11A, 14 . Replacement of the Mg-clay by dolomite is a common feature and is quite clearly seen in the thin sections Fig. 4D, E . A simplified reaction could be written as stevensite 2 8Ca2 7 6CO2 15 6H2 O 2 9dolomite 4H4 SiO4 5 6H Such reaction would decrease the original very high pH. It occurs in both eodiagenetic and mesodiagenetic dolomitization but is more specific for processes that occurred during burial and under the influence of hydrothermal fluids. Replacement of stevensite by finer-crystalline dolomite and by magnesite, as well as by microcrystalline quartz, has also occurred during eodiagenesis. The origin of the huge CO2 volume required for the massive syngenetic and eodiagenetic precipitation of carbonates is one of many mysteries of the Pre-Salt section, but the coeval magmatism and probable mantle exhumation e.g., Boillot et al., 1987 Manatschal and Bernoulli, 1999 Whitmarsh et al., 2001 Kusznir and Karner, 2007 can be considered the most likely sources. The blocky dolomite does not present silica inclusions, which indicates that it is a pre-existing phase that was formed in the carbonate that was later silicified. The hydrothermal saddle dolomite in the rift and sag sections occurs both as replacement for the pre-existing constituents as well as cement filling primary and secondary porosity Fig. 15 . In many situations, these two types appear to have been formed contemporaneously from hot, hypersaline, and acidic fluids, favoring dissolution. When it occurs as a cement filling, the saddle dolomite is characterized by aggregates of large crystals with characteristic curved faces and undulating extinction, being more indicative of a hydrothermal configuration. Important silicification has been described in sedimentary and volcanic rocks, as well as in pedogenetic and hydrothermal deposits, including occurrences as crusts, in individual layers, or even in whole packages in a disseminated pattern. Chert sedimentary siliceous accumulations may have many origins and be related to primary precipitation from siliceous gels Shaw et al., 1990 Chough et al., 1996 diagenetic crystallization of diatoms e.g., Kerrich et al., 2002 silicification of other sediments, notably carbonates e.g., De Wet and Hubert, 1989 Teboul et al., 2019 , radiolaria or sponge spicules subaerial and subaquatic hydrothermal precipitation associated with hot spring systems e.g., Renaut and Owen, 1988 Renaut et al., 2002 eodiagenetic modification of a precursor sodium silicate in saline and alkaline lakes e.g., Sheppard and Gude, 1986 and subaerial precipitation of silcretes under arid climate and high alkalinity pH higher than 9.0 9.5 Hesse, 1989 Jime nez, 2011 . Silica sinters that formed in hot springs systems are characterized by a diversity of depositional environments that originate in a wide variety of fabrics, textures, and compositions and change laterally within the same system and between different occurrences. In these environments, high concentrations of dissolved silica, evaporation, rapid cooling, variations in the pH, cationic effects, physical hydrodynamics, and local conditions in the fluid escape area near hot springs produce siliceous sinters deposits of different geometries e.g., Braunstein and Lowe, 2001 Guidry and Chafetz, 2003a, 2003b, 2003c Jones and Renaut, 2003 Rodgers et al., 2004 Hinman and Walter, 2005 Jones et al., 2007 Campbell et al., 2015 . The formation of superficial silica incrustations in sinters is frequently a product of the decrease in silica solubility with a temperature and or pH drop, which is the main factor affecting the precipitation of hydrothermal silica. CO2 degassing can lead to a sudden increase in pH, which increases the solubility of silica in the residual fluids Jones and Renaut, 1996 . Most lacustrine cherts are composed of microcrystalline and cryptocrystalline silica that precipitate in layers, nodules, and or replacing other sediments. Silicification in the Pre-Salt carbonates of the Campos Basin may be the result of synsedimentary, eodiagenetic and or burial diagenetic processes, or the combination of all these. Several siliceous phases e.g., chert, chalcedony, moganite, tridymite, cristobalite, and quartz have been identified in the Pre-Salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs. The silica in the studied area occurs as follows relatively spaced syngenetic eodiagenetic microquartz crusts with very low or no porosity b3 of the described silica diffuse and discontinuous hydrothermal chert lenses or masses composed of microquartz replacing the carbonate, with or without dolomitization Figs. 14, 15 and microquartz, macroquartz, and chalcedony filling secondary pores and replacing saddle dolomite Fig. 15 . The eodiagenetic chert crusts occur preferably near the top of the sag section and were formed possibly by the subaerial and subaquatic B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 75 Fig. 14. Schematic representation of dolomitization, dissolution, and silicification in sag deposits. A Dolomitization microcrystalline and blocky dolomite partially replacing the Mg-clay matrix, calcite spherulites, and fascicular aggregates. Dolomite rhombohedra partially filling inter-aggregate pores. Magnesite pseudomorphically replacing some matrix laminations B Dissolution of the syngenetic Mg-clay matrix and part of the dolomitized calcite aggregates, thus generating laminar and vugular porosity C Silicification microcrystalline quartz and chalcedony spherulites partially to fully replacing preexisting constituents, and filling growth framework, intra-crystalline aggregate, laminar, matrix-dissolution and vugular pores. Disseminated svanbergite crystals are selectively associated with microcrystalline silica D Selective internal silicification of some dolomitized fascicular and spherulitic aggregates. Scarce remnants of dolomitized primary constituents. 76 B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 Fig. 15. Schematic representation of fracturing, dissolution, and hydrothermal phases filling secondary porosity. A Fracturing and dissolution of pervasively silicified deposits, with the generation of fracture, channel, intra-crystalline aggregates, moldic and vugular pores B Saddle dolomite replacing preexisting constituents and mainly filling the secondary pores C Macrocrystalline, euhedral to subhedral quartz as prismatic rims and mosaics lining and filling the secondary pores and replacing saddle dolomite D Late phases macrocrystalline calcite, radiated Sr-barite and celestine, fibro-radiated zeolite, euhedral to subhedral pyrite, chalcopyrite, galena and sphalerite, and massive bitumen filling the secondary pores. hydrothermal precipitation associated with hot-spring systems or precipitation from evaporated meteoric fluids Teboul et al., 2019 . The pervasive hydrothermal replacement microquartz chert is texturally distinct from eodiagenetic silica crusts that are concordant with depositional bedding. The replacement microquartz crystals occur in an equidimensional manner, suggesting that nucleation sites B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 were evenly distributed and that the supersaturation of the silica fluid was high Gregg and Sibley, 1987 . In many situations, it is possible to even notice the replacement of saddle dolomite by hydrothermal silica Figs. 12F, 15C . Often, phases such as calcite, pyrite, chalcopyrite, galena, Sr-barite, celestine, sphalerite, svanbergite, zeolite, rutile, and bitumen, which are associated with siliceous phases, replace carbonates or cement primary and or secondary pores Fig. 15D . In the Pre-Salt section, hydrothermal silicification occurs in carbonate packages associated with hydrothermal dolomites according to the model proposed by Packard et al. 2001 . The hydrothermal fluids that are responsible for the dolomitization and silicification of carbonates would have had a common origin, only marginally evolved compared to the original composition. Saturated hydrothermal fluids with respect to silica, which are marginally saturated in relation to dolomite but are critically unsaturated with respect to calcite, were responsible for the selective substitution of preexisting carbonate with significant porosity creation. The characterization of the processes that are related to hydrothermal fluids is essential for the establishment of the most adequate production management strategy for these Pre-Salt reservoirs. Analyzing the Pre-Salt interval in the Kwanza Basin, analogous to that of the Campos Basin, Poros et al. 2017 obtained fluid-inclusions homogenization temperatures Th between 95 and 115 C in the dolomite cement, 95 and 125 C in the silica chert and chalcedony replacing carbonate, and between 105 and 125 C in the pore-filling mega-quartz. Those authors interpreted both the replacive chalcedony and the quartz cement that precipitated from high-T fluids T 98 123 C associated with hydrocarbons CH4 and CO2 in a burial diagenesis context. According to Girard and San Miguel 2017 , temperatures ranging from 180 to 200 C that were obtained from the fluid inclusions hosted in dolomite-calcite-quartz-filling intergranular and fracture pores and isotopic analyzes 18O, 13C, 87Sr 86Sr on carbonates indicated a hydrothermal origin for the fluids responsible by the diagenesis that modified the Pre-Salt reservoirs in the Kwanza Basin. The analogy of the Kwanza Basin with patterns that were observed in the Campos Basin Pre-Salt supports the interpretation that the intense dolomitization, silicification and dissolution that were described in part of the analyzed samples may be related to the percolation of hydrothermal fluids through faults and hypogenic karst systems. Some occurrences of APS minerals such as svanbergite are associated with hydrothermal mineralization related to magmatic and or volcanic activity. According to Dill 2001 , hypogenic APS mineralization can be formed from hydrothermal fluids at temperatures as high as 200 C. Vila and Sillitoe 1991 described chalcedony, barite, and APS minerals that precipitated from hydrothermal fluids associated with Cu-Au porphyry-type and epithermal ore deposits in a magmatic-hydrothermal system. The formation of APS minerals is commonly associated with intrusion-driven hydrothermal systems, which may also be responsible for volcanic-hosted APS mineralization Dill, 2001 . In recent years, increasingly important diagenetic changes in carbonate reservoirs have been related to magmatic activities. Magmatic activities may not only provide hydrothermal fluids, but they also cause convection due to high temperature Wilson et al., 2007 Xu et al., 2015 . They may also result in the formation of fractures and secondary porosity, thus creating or modifying preferred paths for the migration and accumulation of hydrocarbons. According to Xu et al. 2015 , in the Bachu region of the Tarim Basin, northwest of China, hydrothermal fluids migrated to Ordovician carbonate rocks along faults, fractures, unconformities and or lithological contacts during the intrusive magmatism that occurred in the Cambrian and Permian. Hiemstra and Goldstein 2015 reported episodic injections of hydrothermal fluids associated with tectonic and magmatic activity on Pennsylvanian marine carbonates in the Indian Basin, U.S.A. A potential source of Mg, silica and heat in hydrothermal systems in the Pre-Salt deposits of the Campos Basin could be provided by the intrusive and extrusive magmatic rocks that occur in the Campos Basin and or by the serpentinization of the exhumed mantle Pinto et al., 2017 . Winter et al. 2007 describe magmatic events occurring in the 77 rift phase during deposition of the sag section and in the Santonian Campanian. According to Wendte et al. 1998 , the dolomitization that was caused by the brines that formed from the subsurface dissolution of evaporite deposits could have been discarded due to the low volumes of Mg. 5.4. Paragenetic evolution The sequence of post-depositional processes affecting the sag and rift intervals was interpreted based on the paragenetic relationships of the processes and products with primary constituents, among each other and with the pores, as observed in optical, electronic, and cathodoluminescence images, and attributed to eodiagenetic, mesodiagenetic, and hydrothermal stages. The relative timing of each process product, and its importance relative to porosity evolution are summarized in Fig. 16. In the diagenetic evolution that was recognized in the analyzed Aptian rocks, fracturing occurred preferentially in the intervals that were more intensely affected by silicification. Dissolution promoted the generation of channel, intra-crystalline aggregates, moldic, and vugular pores Fig. 15A . Zoned saddle dolomite with red-zonation CL patterns Fig. 11C, D, E occurs replacing pre-existing constituents and mainly filling secondary fracture, channel, growth framework, intra-crystalline aggregates, moldic, and vugular porosity Fig. 15B . Prismatic rims and mosaic macrocrystalline quartz fills secondary pores, and replaces saddle dolomite Fig. 15C . The late hydrothermal phases macrocrystalline calcite, zeolite, Sr-barite, celestine, pyrite, chalcopyrite, galena, sphalerite, and bitumen fill growth framework, fracture, and dissolution pores Figs. 10, 11, 15 . Sr-barite and celestine aggregates also occur replacing pre-existing constituents Fig. 10E . The paragenetic relationships among hydrothermal cements filling primary and secondary pores and or replacing pre-existing constituents, indicate a predominance of the following precipitation sequence saddle dolomite quartz pyrite, chalcopyrite, and galena sphalerite Sr-barite and celestine macrocrystalline calcite zeolite and solid bitumen. Locally, the dissolution of some hydrothermal phases, such as saddle dolomite, sphalerite, zeolite, and Sr-barite, is responsible for the generation of intracrystalline porosity. Macrocrystalline mosaic calcite with orange-CL zonation commonly fills both primary and secondary porosity and occurs more frequently in large dissolution cavities and fractures Fig. 11D, E, F . Solid bitumen is described as a usual component in hydrothermal mineral paragenesis e.g., Anderson, 1991 Mansurbeg et al., 2016 that is associated with relatively high-temperature barite, fluorite, sphalerite, and saddle dolomite. The occurrence of solid bitumen in barite hydrothermal mineralization is very common in some geological contexts e.g., Paradis and Lavoie, 1996 Pique et al., 2009 . The dynamic and cyclical characters of the precipitation and dissolution processes of these mineral phases are related to intrinsic characteristics of hydrothermal alteration, associated with its transient, multiphase, and multi-episode aspects and to the variable chemical composition of the fluids. The mixing of hydrothermal and formation fluids may favor dissolution, especially in carbonate rocks, and the consequent formation of secondary porosity Corbella et al., 2006 Biehl et al., 2016 . Despite its possible reduced effect on the total pore volume, pores that connected more frankly and effectively in the vicinity of these hydrothermal vents should have a great influence on the dynamic behavior of the reservoir. In this system, the fractures acted as important conduits through which the hydrothermal fluids were injected, thus creating moldic and vugular porosity. In the rift bioclastic deposits, much of the diagenesis occurred prior to compaction. During eodiagenesis, the following processes occurred micritization aragonite to calcite neomorphism bioclasts dissolution cementation by drusy rims and blocky calcite and dolomite filling interparticle, intraparticle, moldic, and vugular porosity and replacement of pre-existing constituents by microquartz and or 78 B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 Fig. 16. Diagenetic sequences interpreted for sag fascicular calcite crusts and rift bioclastic grainstones and rudstones modified from Herlinger Jr. et al., 2017 . Thicker and dashed lines correspond to more and less intense processes and products, respectively. chalcedony silicification and dolomite dolomitization . The sequence of processes affecting these deposits during mesodiagenesis and hydrothermal alteration is very similar to that observed in the Aptian sag deposits, with the exception of zeolite and rutile, which were not observed in the analyzed rift samples. These mineral phases occur in very small quantities, and their absence in the rift samples is probably only a low sampling effect. 6. Conclusions Syngenetic magnesian phyllosilicates mostly stevensite, and kerolite , as clay laminations and peloids with subordinate siliciclastic mud contribution, constituted the background of the sag lacustrine sedimentation in the Pre-Salt carbonate reservoirs of the northern Campos Basin and the substrate onto which fascicular calcite crusts, and within which diagenetic calcite spherulites were precipitated. This variation promoted the formation of a cyclic pattern of laminated syngenetic magnesian clays at the base that were partially replaced and displaced by calcite spherulites in the middle, and syngenetic crusts of coalesced and non-coalesced fascicular calcite aggregates at the top. The interruption and deformation of the stevensite laminations clearly indicates that the Pre-Salt calcite spherulites were formed within these fine-grained deposits during eodiagenesis, and not as particles in the water column. The alternated precipitation of magnesian clay laminations and fascicular calcite crusts in the Aptian deposits of the northern Campos Basin was related to variations in pH, Mg, Si and Ca activities, temperature, and pCO2 in the sag lacustrine waters. These changes in lake water chemistry occurred possibly due to magmatic events and or a mantle contribution. Porosity is predominantly secondary in the rift and sag intervals, where the main pore types are growth-framework, intercrystalline and intra-crystalline aggregates, interparticle, intraparticle, Mg-clay matrix dissolution, laminar, moldic, vugular, channel, fracture, and breccia. The most relevant cements filling primary, secondary dissolution, and fracture porosity in the rift and sag phases were calcite, dolomite, microcrystalline silica, chalcedony, quartz, pyrite, chalcopyrite, galena, Sr-barite, celestine, sphalerite, svanbergite, zeolite, rutile and bitumen. Many samples demonstrate dissolution, recrystallization, dolomitization and or silicification, ranging from incipient to pervasive, locally originating dolostones and cherts. Typically, dolomite selectively replaced the interstitial Mg-clay sediments, while the calcite spherulitic and fascicular aggregates were only marginally dolomitized. Silicification commonly occurred subsequent to dolomitization. Saddle dolomite, calcite, quartz, chalcedony, svanbergite, Sr-barite, celestine, pyrite, chalcopyrite, galena, sphalerite, zeolite, and bitumen were precipitated by the episodic flow of hydrothermal fluids, replacing B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 pre-existing constituents and filling fractures and dissolution porosity. Fault and fracture systems constituted important pathways through which fluid flow was focused, causing dissolution, precipitation of mineral phases, and reorganization of the pore systems. More limited hydrothermal processes were observed in the sag laminites and the in rift stevensitic ooidal arenites, possibly due to the limited primary porosity of these facies. The hydrothermal alteration of the Pre-Salt deposits was probably related to magmatic activity or a mantle exhumation occurring in the Campos Basin during the Cretaceous. The importance of integrated studies for the characterization and prediction of depositional facies, diagenesis, hydrothermal alteration and, consequently, quality distribution in the Pre-Salt reservoirs should be emphasized. Acknowledgements We are grateful to Petro leo Brasileiro S.A., Petrobras, for permission to publish this paper and for supporting this study. We thank, specifically, the assistance provided by the Petrobras Research Center CENPES and the Regional Center for Technological Development and Innovation CRTI at the Federal University of Goias UFG . The authors wish also to thank the editor and the reviewers for their constructive suggestions that helped improve the manuscript, and the Postgraduate Geosciences Program of the Rio Grande do Sul Federal University UFRGS for all their support and the use of their laboratories. Appendix A. Supplementary data Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https doi. org 10.1016 j.sedgeo.2019.01.006. References Abraha o, D., Warme, J.E., 1990. Lacustrine and associated deposits in a rifted continental margin lower cretaceous Lagoa Feia Formation, Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. In Katz, B.J. Ed. , Lacustrine Basin Exploration Case Studies and Modern Analogs. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir vol. 50, pp. 287 305. Alvarenga, R.S., Iacopini, D., Kuchle, J., Scherer, C.M.S., Goldberg, K., 2016. Seismic characteristics and distribution of hydrothermal vent complexes in the Cretaceous offshore rift section of the Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Marine and Petroleum Geology 74, 12 25. Anderson, G.M., 1991. Organic maturation and ore precipitation in Southeast Missouri. Economic Geology 86 5 , 909 926. Armelenti, G., Goldberg, K., Kuchle, J., De Ros, L.F., 2016. Deposition, diagenesis and reservoir potential of non-carbonate sedimentary rocks from the rift section of Campos Basin, Brazil. Petroleum Geoscience 22 3 , 223 239. Austin, J.A., Uchupi, E., 1982. Continental-oceanic crustal transition off Southwest Africa. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin 66, 1328 1347. Baumgarten, C.S., Dultra, A.J.C., Scuta, M.S., Figueiredo, M.V.L., Sequeira, M.F.P.B., 1988. Coquinas da Formac a o Lagoa Feia, Bacia de Campos evoluc a o da geologia de desenvolvimento. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras 2 1 , 27 36 in Portuguese . Bertani, R.T., Carozzi, A.V., 1985a. Lagoa Feia Formation Lower Cretaceous , Campos Basin, offshore Brazil rift valley stage lacustrine carbonate reservoirs, I. Journal of Petroleum Geology 8, 37 58. Bertani, R.T., Carozzi, A.V., 1985b. Lagoa Feia Formation Lower Cretaceous Campos Basin, offshore Brazil rift valley type lacustrine carbonate reservoirs, II. Journal of Petroleum Geology 8, 199 220. Biehl, B.C., Reuning, L., Schoenherr, J., Lu ders, V., Kukla, P.A., 2016. Impacts of hydrothermal dolomitization and thermochemical sulfate reduction on secondary porosity creation in deeply buried carbonates a case study from the Lower Saxony Basin, Northwest Germany. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin 100 4 , 597 621. Boillot, G., Recq, M., Winterer, E.L., Meyer, A.W., Applegate, J., Baltuck, M., Bergen, J.A., Comas, M.C., Davies, T.A., Dunham, K., Evans, C.A., Girardeau, J., Goldberg, G., Haggerty, J., Jansa, L.F., Johnson, J.A., Kasahara, J., Loreau, J.P., Luna-Sierra, E., Moullade, M., Ogg, J., Sarti, M., Thurow, J., Williamson, M., 1987. Tectonic denudation of the upper mantle along passive margins a model based on drilling results ODP leg 103, western Galicia margin, Spain . Tectonophysics 132, 335 342. Bradley, W.H., Fahey, J.J., 1962. Occurrence of stevensite in the Green River Formation of Wyoming. American Mineralogist 47, 996 998. Braunstein, D., Lowe, D.R., 2001. Relationship between spring and geyser activity and the deposition and morphology of high temperature N73 C siliceous sinter, Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming, USA. Journal of Sedimentary Research 71, 747 763. 79 Burne, R.V., Moore, L.S., 1987. Microbialites organosedimentary deposits of benthic microbial communities. PALAIOS 2, 255 262. Cainelli, C., Mohriak, W.U., 1999. Some remarks on the evolution of sedimentary basins along the Eastern Brazilian continental margin. Episodes 22, 206 216. Calvo, J.P., Blanc-Valleron, M.M., Rodri guez-Ara ndia, J.P., Rouchy, J.M., Sanz, M.E., 1999. Authigenic clay minerals in continental evaporitic environments. In Thiry, M., Simon-Coinc on, R. Eds. , Palaeoweathering, Palaeosurfaces and Related Continental Deposits. International Association of Sedimentologists, Special Publication vol. 27, pp. 129 151. Campbell, K.A., Guido, D.M., Gautret, P., Foucher, F., Ramboz, C., Westall, F., 2015. Geyserite in hot-spring siliceous sinter Window on Earth s hottest terrestrial paleo environment and its extreme life. Earth-Science Reviews 148, 44 64. Carminatti, M., Dias, J.L., Wolff, B., 2009. From turbidites to carbonates breaking paradigms in deep waters. Offshore Technology Conference. Houston, Texas, USA, OTC 20124. Carvalho, M.D., Prac a, U.M., Silva-Telles, A.C., Jahnert, R.J., Dias, L.D., 2000. Bioclastic carbonate lacustrine facies models in the Campos Basin Lower Cretaceous , Brazil. In Gierlowski-Kordesch, E., Kelts, K.R. Eds. , Lake Basins through Space and Time. Studies in Geology vol. 46. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, USA, pp. 245 255. Chafetz, H.S., Barth, J., Cook, M., Guo, X., Zhou, J., 2018. Origins of carbonate spherulites implications for Brazilian Aptian Pre-Salt reservoir. Sedimentary Geology 365, 21 33. Chafetz, H.S., Butler, J.C., 1980. Petrology of recent caliche pisolites, spherulites, and speleothem deposits from Central Texas. Sedimentology 27, 497 518. Chafetz, H.S., Guidry, S.A., 1999. Bacterial shrubs, crystal shrubs, and ray-crystal shrubs bacterial vs. abiotic precipitation. Sedimentary Geology 126, 57 74. Choquette, P.W., Pray, L.C., 1970. Geologic nomenclature and classification of porosity in sedimentary carbonates. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin 54, 207 250. Chough, S.K., Kim, S.B., Chun, S.S., 1996. Sandstone chert and laminated chert black shale couplets, Cretaceous Uhangri Formation Southwest Korea depositional events in alkaline lake environments. Sedimentary Geology 104 1 , 227 242. Coniglio, M., Frizzell, R., Pratt, B.R., 2004. Reef-capping laminites in the Upper Silurian carbonate-to-evaporite transition, Michigan Basin, South-Western Ontario. Sedimentology 51, 653 668. Corbella, M., Ayora, C., Cardellach, E., Soler, A., 2006. Reactive transport modeling and hydrothermal karst genesis the example of the Rocabruna barite deposit Eastern Pyrenees . Chemical Geology 233, 113 125. Cuevas, J., De La Villa, R.V., Ramirez, S., Petit, S., Meunier, A., Leguey, S., 2003. Chemistry of Mg smectites in lacustrine sediments from the Vicalvaro Sepiolite Deposit, Madrid Neogene Basin Spain . Clays and Clay Minerals 51 4 , 457 472. Darragi, F., Tardy, Y., 1987. Authigenic trioctahedral smectites controlling pH, alkalinity, silica and magnesium concentrations in alkaline lakes. Chemical Geology 63 1 2 , 59 72. Davies, G.R., 2004. Hydrothermal thermobaric dolomitization rock fabrics and organic petrology. In McAuley, R. Ed. , Dolomites - The Spectrum Mechanisms, Models, Reservoir Development. Canadian Society of Petroleum Geologists, Seminar and Core Conference. Calgary, Alberta, Canada, p. 17. Davies, G.R., Smith, L.B.J., 2006. Structurally controlled hydrothermal dolomite reservoir facies an overview. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin 90 11 , 1641 1690. De Wet, B.C.C., Hubert, J.F., 1989. The Scots Bay Formation, Nova Scotia, Canada, a Jurassic carbonate lake with silica-rich hydrothermal springs. Sedimentology 36 5 , 857 873. De Wet, C.B., Mora, C.I., Gore, P.J.W., Gierlowski-Kordesch, E.H., Cucolo, S.J., 2002. Deposition and geochemistry of lacustrine and spring carbonates in Mesozoic rift basins, eastern North America. In Renaut, R., Ashley, G. Eds. , Sedimentation in Continental Rifts. SEPM, Special Publication vol. 73, pp. 309 325. Dias, J.L., 2005. Tecto nica, estratigrafia e sedimentac a o no Andar Aptiano da margem leste brasileira. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras 13, 7 25 in Portuguese . Dias, J.L., Oliveira, J., Vieira, J., 1988. Sedimentological and stratigraphic analysis of the Lagoa Feia Formation, rift phase of Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Revista Brasileira de Geociencias 18, 252 260. Dickson, J.A.D., 1965. A modified staining technique for carbonates in thin section. Nature 205, 587. Dill, H.G., 2001. The geology of aluminum phosphate and sulphates of the alunite group minerals a review. Earth-Science Reviews 53, 35 93. Girard, J.P., San Miguel, G., 2017. Evidence of high temperature hydrothermal regimes in the Pre-Salt Series, Kwanza Basin, Offshore Angola. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Annual Convention and Exhibition. Houston, Texas, USA Abstracts . Goldberg, K., Kuchle, J., Scherer, C., Alvarenga, R., Ene, P.L., Armelenti, G., De Ros, L.F., 2017. Re-sedimented deposits in the rift section of the Campos Basin. Marine and Petroleum Geology 80, 412 431. Gregg, J.M., Sibley, D.F., 1987. Classification of dolomite rock textures. Journal of Sedimentary Petrology 57 6 , 967 975. Grotzinger, J.P., Knoll, A.H., 1999. Stromatolites in Precambrian carbonates evolutionary mileposts or environmental dipsticks Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences 27, 313 358. Guidry, S.A., Chafetz, H.S., 2003a. Anatomy of siliceous hot spring examples from Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming, USA. Sedimentary Geology 157, 71 106. Guidry, S.A., Chafetz, H.S., 2003b. Depositional facies and diagenetic alteration in a relict siliceous hot-spring accumulation examples from Yellowstone National Park, USA. Journal of Sedimentary Research 73, 806 823. Guidry, S.A., Chafetz, H.S., 2003c. Siliceous shrubs in hot springs from Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming, USA. Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences 40, 1571 1583. 80 B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 Herlinger Jr., R., Zambonato, E.E., De Ros, L.F., 2017. Influence of diagenesis on the quality of lower cretaceous Pre-Salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs from northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Journal of Sedimentary Research 87, 1285 1313. Hesse, R., 1989. Silica diagenesis origin of inorganic and replacement cherts. Earth-Science Reviews 26, 253 284. Hiemstra, E.J., Goldstein, R.H., 2015. Repeated injection of hydrothermal fluids into downdip carbonates a diagenetic and stratigraphic mechanism for localization of reservoir porosity, Indian Basin Field, New Mexico, USA. In Agar, S.M., Geiger, S. Eds. , Fundamental Controls on Fluid Flow in Carbonates Current Workflows to Emerging Technologies. Geological Society, London, Special Publications vol. 406, pp. 141 177. Hinman, N.W., Walter, M.R., 2005. Textural preservation in siliceous hot spring deposits during early diagenesis examples from Yellowstone National Park and Nevada, USA. Journal of Sedimentary Research 75, 200 215. Hodgson, W.A., 1968. The diagenesis of spherulitic carbonate concretions and other rocks from Mangakahia Group sediments, Kaipara Harbour, New Zealand. Journal of Sedimentary Research 38 4 , 1254 1263. Jime nez, J.L.P., 2011. Sedimentologi a, Silicificaciones y Otros Procesos Diagene ticos en las Unidades Intermedia y Superior del Mioceno de la Cuenca de Madrid zonas NE, NW y W . PhD Thesis . Universidad complutense de Madrid, Facultad de Ciencias Geolo gicas, Departamento de Petrologi a y Geoqui mica, p. 336 in Spanish . Jones, B., De Ronde, C.E.J., Renaut, R.W., Owen, R.B., 2007. Siliceous sublacustrine spring deposits around hydrothermal vents in Lake Taupo, New Zealand. Journal of the Geological Society of London 164 1 , 227 242. Jones, B., Renaut, R.W., 1996. Influence of thermophilic bacteria on calcite and silica precipitation in hot springs with water temperatures above 90 C evidence from Kenya and New Zealand. Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences 33, 72 83. Jones, B., Renaut, R.W., 2003. Hot spring and geyser sinters the integrated product of precipitation, replacement, and deposition. Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences 40, 1549 1569. Jones, G.D., Xiao, Y., 2013. Geothermal convection in South Atlantic subsalt lacustrine carbonates developing diagenesis and reservoir quality predictive concepts with reactive transport models. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin 97 8 , 1249 1271. Kendall, A., 1977. Fascicular-optic calcite a replacement of bundled acicular carbonate cements. Journal of Sedimentary Petrology 47, 1056 1062. Kerrich, R., Renaut, R.W., Bonli, T., 2002. Trace element composition of cherts from alkaline lakes in the East African Rift a probe for ancient counterparts. SEPM Special Publication 73, 275 294. Kusznir, N.J., Karner, G.D., 2007. Continental lithospheric thinning and breakup in response to upwelling divergent mantle flow application to the Woodlark, Newfoundland and Iberia margins. In Karner, G.D., Manatschal, G., Pinheiro, L.M. Eds. , Imaging, Mapping and Modelling Continental Lithosphere Extension and Breakup. Geological Society, London, Special Publications vol. 282, pp. 389 419. Lepley, S., Piccoli, L., Chitale, V., Kelley, I., Quest, M., 2017. The importance of understanding diagenesis for the development of Pre-Salt lacustrine carbonates. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Annual Convention and Exhibition. Houston, Texas, USA Abstracts . Leyden, R., Asmus, H., Zembruscki, S., Bryan, G., 1976. South Atlantic diapiric structures. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin 60 2 , 196 212. Machel, H.G., 2004. Concepts and models of dolomitization a critical reappraisal. In Braithwaite, C.J.R., Rizzi, G., Darke, G. Eds. , The Geometry and Petrogenesis of Dolomite Hydrocarbon Reservoirs. Geological Society, London, Special Publications vol. 235, pp. 7 63. Machel, H.G., Lonnee, J., 2002. Hydrothermal dolomite a product of poor definition and imagination. Sedimentary Geology 152, 163 171. Manatschal, G., Bernoulli, D., 1999. Architecture and tectonic evolution of nonvolcanic margins present day Galicia and ancient Adria. Tectonics 18, 1099 1119. Mansurbeg, H., Morad, D., Othmana, R., Morad, S., Ceriani, A., Al-aasm, I., Kolo, K., Spirov, P., Proust, J.N., Preat, A., Koyi, H., 2016. Hydrothermal dolomitization of the Bekhme formation Upper Cretaceous , Zagros Basin, Kurdistan Region of Iraq Record of oil migration and degradation. Sedimentary Geology 341, 147 162. Mckenzie, D., 1978. Some remarks on the development of sedimentary basins. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 40, 25 32. Mercedes-Marti n, R., Brasier, A.T., Rogerson, M., Reijmer, J.J.G., Vonhof, H., Pedley, M., 2017. A depositional model for spherulitic carbonates associated with alkaline, volcanic lakes. Marine and Petroleum Geology 86, 168 191. Mercedes-Marti n, R., Rogerson, M., Brasier, A.T., Vonhof, H.B., Prior, T.J., Fellows, S.M., Reijmer, J.J.G., Billing, I., Pedley, H.M., 2016. Growing spherulitic grains in saline, hyperalkaline lakes experimental evaluation of the effects of Mg-clays and organic acids. Sedimentary Geology 335, 93 102. Mohriak, W., Nemcok, M., Enciso, G., 2008. South Atlantic divergent margin evolution rift-border uplift and salt tectonics in the basins of SE Brazil. In Pankhurst, R.J., Trouw, R.A.J., Brito Neves, B.B., De Wit, M.J. Eds. , West Gondwana Pre-Cenozoic Correlations across the South Atlantic Region. Geological Society, London, Special Publications vol. 294, pp. 365 398. Muniz, M.C., Bosence, D.W.J., 2015. Pre-Salt microbialites from the Campos Basin offshore Brazil image log facies, facies model and cyclicity in lacustrine carbonates. In Bosence, D.W.J., Gibbons, K.A., LeHeron, D.P., Morgan, W.A., Pritchard, T., Vining, B.A. Eds. , Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. Geological Society, London, Special Publications vol. 418, pp. 221 242. Neilson, J.E., Oxtoby, N.H., 2008. The relationship between petroleum, exotic cements and reservoir quality in carbonates - a review. Marine and Petroleum Geology 25, 778 790. Nu rnberg, D., Mu ller, R.D., 1991. The tectonic evolution of the South Atlantic from Late Jurassic to present. Tectonophysics 191, 27 53. Packard, J.J., Al-Aasm, I.S., Samson, I., Berger, Z., Davies, J., 2001. A Devonian hydrothermal chert reservoir the 225 bcf Parkland field, British Columbia, Canada. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin 85 1 , 51 84. Paradis, S., Lavoie, D., 1996. Multiple-stage diagenetic alteration and fluid history of Ordovician carbonate-hosted barite mineralization, Southern Quebec Appalachians. Sedimentary Geology 107 1 2 , 121 139. Pinto, V.H.G., Manatschal, G., Karpoff, A.M., Ulrich, M., Viana, A.R., 2017. Seawater storage and element transfer associated with mantle serpentinization in magma-poor rifted margins a quantitative approach. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 459, 227 237. Pique , A ., Sabate , A .C., Disnar, J.R., Borra s, F.G., 2009. In situ thermochemical sulfate reduction during ore formation at the Itxaspe Zn- Pb MVT occurrence Basque-Cantabrian basin, Northern Spain . Geologica Acta 7 4 , 431 449. Poros, Z., Jagniecki, E., Luczaj, J., Kenter, J., Gal, B., Correa, T.S., Ferreira, E., McFadden, K.A., Elifritz, A., Heumann, M., Johnston, M., Matt, V., 2017. Origin of silica in Pre-Salt carbonates, Kwanza Basin, Angola. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Annual Convention and Exhibition. Houston, Texas, USA. Pozo, M., Calvo, J.P., 2018. An overview of authigenic magnesian clays. Minerals 8 520 , 1 22. Magnesian Clays Characterization, Origin and Applications. In Pozo, M., Gala n, E. Eds. , AIPEA Educational Series. 2. AIPEA, Bari, Italy, p. 380. Rabinowitz, P.D., Labrecque, J., 1979. The Mesozoic South Atlantic Ocean and evolution of its continental margins. Journal of Geophysical Research 84, 5973 6002. Renaut, R.W., Jones, B., Tiercelin, J.J., Tarits, C., 2002. Sublacustrine precipitation of hydrothermal silica in rift lakes evidence from Lake Baringo, Central Kenya Rift Valley. Sedimentary Geology 148, 235 257. Renaut, R.W., Owen, R.B., 1988. Opaline cherts associated with sublacustrine hydrothermal springs at Lake Bogoria, Kenya, Rift Valley. Geology 16, 699 702. Renaut, R.W., Tiercelin, J.J., Owen, R.B., 1986. Mineral precipitation and diagenesis in the sediments of the Lake Bogoria Basin, Kenya Rift Valley. In Frostick, L. Ed. , Sedimentation in the African Rift. Geological Society, London, Special Publications vol. 25, pp. 159 175. Riding, R., 2000. Microbial carbonates the geological record of calcified bacterial-algal mats and biofilms. Sedimentology 47 Suppl. 1 , 179 214. Riding, R., 2008. Abiogenic, microbial and hybrid authigenic carbonate crusts components of Precambrian stromatolites. Geologia Croatica 61, 73 103. Rodgers, K.A., Browne, P.R.L., Buddle, T.F., Cook, K.L., Greatrex, R.A., Hampton, W.A., Herdianita, N.R., Holland, G.R., Lynne, B.Y., Martin, R., Newton, Z., Pastars, D., Sannazarro, K.L., Teece, C.I.A., 2004. Silica phases in sinters and residues from geothermal fields of New Zealand. Earth-Science Reviews 66, 1 61. Sabato Ceraldi, T., Green, D., 2016. Evolution of the South Atlantic lacustrine deposits in response to Early Cretaceous rifting, subsidence and lake hydrology. In Sabato Ceraldi, R.A., Hodgkinson, T., Backe, G. Eds. , Petroleum Geoscience of the West Africa Margin. Geological Society, London, Special Publications vol. 438, pp. 77 98. Saller, A., Rushton, S., Buambua, L., Inman, K., Mcneil, R., Dickson, J.A.D., 2016. Pre-Salt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin 100, 1135 1164. Schroeder, J.H., 1972. Fabrics and sequences of submarine carbonate cements in Holocene Bermuda cup reefs. Geologische Rundschau 61, 708 730. Shaw, P.A., Cooke, H.J., Perry, C.C., 1990. Microbialitic silcretes in highly alkaline environments some observations from Sua Pan, Botswana. South African Journal of Geology 93 5 6 , 803 808. Sheppard, R.A., Gude, A.J., 1986. Magadi-type chert - a distinctive diagenetic variety from lacustrine deposits. In Mumpton, F.A. Ed. Studies in Diagenesis. U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin vol. 1578, pp. 335 345. Teboul, P.A., Durlet, C., Girard, J.P., Dubois, L., Miguel, G.S., Virgone, A., Gaucher, E.C., Camoin, G., 2019. Diversity and origin of quartz cements in continental carbonates example from the Lower Cretaceous rift deposits of the South Atlantic margin. Applied Geochemistry 100, 22 41. Teboul, P.A., Kluska, J.M., Marty, N.C.M., Debure, M., Durlet, C., Virgone, A., Gaucher, E.C., 2017. Volcanic rock alterations of the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola - Insights from an integrated petrological, geochemical and numerical approach. Marine and Petroleum Geology 80, 394 411. Tettenhorst, R., Moore, G.E.J., 1978. Stevensite oolites from the Green River Formation of Central Utah. Journal of Sedimentary Petrology 48 2 , 587 594. Thompson, D.L., Stilwell, J., Hall, M., 2015. Lacustrine carbonate reservoirs from Early Cretaceous rift lakes of Western Gondwana Pre-Salt coquinas of Brazil and West Africa. Gondwana Research 28, 26 51. Torsvik, T.H., Rousse, S., Labails, C., Smethurst, M.A., 2009. A new scheme for the opening of the South Atlantic Ocean and the dissection of an Aptian salt basin. Geophysical Journal International 177, 1315 1333. Tosca, N.J., Masterson, A.L., 2014. Chemical controls on incipient Mg-silicate crystallization at 25 C implications for early and late diagenesis. Clay Minerals 49, 165 194. Tosca, N.J., Wright, V.P., 2014. The formation and diagenesis of Mg-clay minerals in lacustrine carbonate reservoirs. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Annual Convention and Exhibition. Houston, Texas, USA Search and Discovery Article 51002 . Tosca, N.J., Wright, V.P., 2015. Diagenetic pathways linked to labile Mg-clays in lacustrine carbonate reservoirs a model for the origin of secondary porosity in the Cretaceous Pre-Salt Barra Velha Formation, offshore Brazil. In Armitage, P.J., Butcher, A.R., Churchill, J.M., Csoma, A.E., Hollis, C., Lander, R.H., Omma, J.E., Worden, R.H. Eds. , Reservoir Quality of Clastic and Carbonate Rocks Analysis, Modelling and Prediction. Geological Society, London, Special Publications vol. 435, pp. 33 46. Turner, S., Regelous, M., Kelley, S., Hawkesworth, C., Mantovani, M., 1994. Magmatism and continental break-up in the South Atlantic high precision 40Ar-39Ar geochronology. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 121, 333 348. B.E.M. Lima, L.F. De Ros Sedimentary Geology 383 2019 55 81 Verrecchia, E.P., Freytet, P., Verrecchia, K.E., Dumont, J.L., 1995. Spherulites in calcrete laminar crusts biogenic CaCO3 precipitation as a major contributor to crust formation. Journal of Sedimentary Research 65A 4 , 690 700. Vieira de Luca, P.H., Matias, H., Carballo, J., Sineva, D., Pimentel, G.A., Tritlla, J., Esteban, M., Loma, R., Alonso, J.L.A., Jime nez, R.P., Pontet, M., Martinez, P.B., Vega, V., 2017. Breaking barriers and paradigms in presalt exploration The Pa o de Ac u car discovery offshore Brazil . In Merrill, R.K., Sternbach, C.A. Eds. , Giant Fields of the Decade 2000 2010. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, USA, Memoir vol. 113, pp. 177 194. Vila, T., Sillitoe, R.H., 1991. Gold-rich porphyry systems in the Maricunga Belt, northern Chile. Economic Geology 86, 1238 1260. Wendte, J., Qing, H., Dravis, J.J., Moore, S.L.O., Stasiuk, L.O., Ward, G., 1998. Hightemperature saline thermoflux dolomitization of Devonian Swan Hills platform and bank carbonates, Wild River area, west-central Alberta. Bulletin of Canadian Petroleum Geology 46 2 , 210 265. White, N., McKenzie, D., 1988. Formation of the steer s head geometry of sedimentary basins by differential stretching of the crust and mantle. Geology 16, 250 253. Whitmarsh, R.B., Manatschal, G., Minshull, T.A., 2001. Evolution of magma-poor continental margins from rifting to sea-floor spreading. Nature 413, 150 153. Wilson, M.I.J., Evans, M.J., Oxtoby, N.H., Nas, D.S., Donnelly, T., Thirwall, M., 2007. Reservoir quality, textural evolution, and origin of fault-associated dolomites. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin 91, 1247 1272. 81 Winter, W.R., Jahnert, R.J., Franc a, A.B., 2007. Bacia de Campos. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras 15, 511 529 in Portuguese . Wright, V.P., Barnett, A., 2017. Classifying reservoir carbonates when the status quo simply does not work a case study from the Cretaceous of the South Atlantic. Search and Discovery Article 51419. Adapted from oral presentation given at AAPG 2017 Annual Convention and Exhibition, Houston, Texas, USA, April 2-5, 2017. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2014. Cyclicity and carbonate-silicate gel interactions in Cretaceous alkaline lakes. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Annual Convention and Exhibition, Houston, Texas, USA. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2015. An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic Early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates. In Grotzinger, J.P., James, N. Eds. , Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. Geological Society, London, Special Publication vol. 418, pp. 209 219. Wright, V.P., Tosca, N.J., 2016. Geochemical model for the formation of the Pre-Salt reservoirs, Santos Basin, Brazil implications for understanding reservoir distribution. Search and Discovery Article 51304. Adapted from oral presentation given at AAPG Annual Convention Exhibition, Calgary, Alberta, Canada, June 19 22, 2016. Xu, K., Yu, B., Gong, H., Ruan, Z., Pan, Y., Ren, Y., 2015. Carbonate reservoirs modified by magmatic intrusions in the Bachu area, Tarim Basin, NW China. Geoscience Frontiers 6, 779 790. Young, R.A., 1995. The Rietveld Method. International Union of Crystallography, Oxford University Press, Oxford, New York, NY, p. 298.

[END_OF_PAPER]

Marine and Petroleum Geology 135 2022 105392 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Marine and Petroleum Geology journal homepage www.elsevier.com locate marpetgeo Fault-related fracture modeling in a pre-salt lacustrine carbonate reservoir from Santos Basin, offshore Brazil Predicting preferential fluid flow paths using 3D geological and flow simulation models Ana Paula Burgoa Tanaka a, , Joa o Paulo Gomes Borges b, c, Gabriel Correa de Matos d, e, Maria Taryn Relvas Campos b, Bruno Miranda Cunha a, f, Roge rio Brandi de Souza a, Jefter Natan de Moraes Caldeira a, Tatiana Alice Soares de Oliveira d, Diogo Reato Marc on b, Ana Paula Martins Lima b a Petrobras Santos Business Unit, Rua Marque s de Herval, 90, Santos, SP, 11010-310, Brazil Petrobras S.A., Avenida Henrique Valadares, 28, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 20231-030, Brazil c School of Earth Sciences, University of Bristol, Queens Road, Bristol, BS8 1RJ, England, UK d Petrobras, Research Center, Avenida Hora cio Macedo, 950, Cidade Universita ria, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 21941-915, Brazil e Equinor Brasil, Rua do Russel, 804, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 22210-010, Brazil f Escola Polite cnica da Universidade de Sa o Paulo. Prac a Coronel Narciso de Andrade, Vila Matias, Santos, SP, 11013-560, Brazil b A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T Keywords Reservoir DFN Simulation Fracture corridor Relay ramp Permeability Anisotropy The authors propose an integrated workflow from seismic to flow simulation to predict sub seismic and inter-well fracture distribution. This methodology provides insights in order to fulfill a knowledge gap in reservoir 3D modeling of naturally fractured carbonates applied in the industry. The workflow includes interpretation of borehole image logs, 3D seismic, geophysical and geomechanical attributes, and calibration with dynamic data. The main natural fracture parameters analyzed for the case study are direction, dip, and fracture intensity. The studied area is a naturally fractured Aptian lacustrine carbonate reservoir within the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. The isolated platform developed over a series of elongated NE-SW horsts structures. The main seismic scale structures in the reservoir are NE-SW trending faults that show normal displacement, defining en e chelon relay ramps that contain NW-SE sub seismic faults and diffuse fracture swarms. The damage zones that surround these main faults define continuous fracture corridors intercepted by oblique sub-seismic faults in relay-ramp zones. Structural analysis showed that fracture intensities are higher at the north domain in the Barra Velha Formation. The fractures were simulated stochastically using a discrete fracture network DFN , generating a dual porosity and dual permeability model DPDK for the flow simulation resulting in a suitable model configuration for the history match. 1. Introduction The studied area is situated in the southeast portion of the conti nental margin of Brazil, in the South Atlantic Ocean, its formation is associated with multiphase rifting processes on the Western Gondwana paleocontinent during the Mesozoic. The field is in the central portion of the Santos Basin in a position of a long-lived basement paleo structural high known as the Outer High of Santos Basin Gomes et al., 2012 or as the Santos External High Carminatti et al., 2009 Fig. 1 . The area corresponds to a transition zone between two of the main sub-highs of the Outer High of Santos Basin and shows dominantly NNE-striking normal faults. The horst and graben structural pattern is persistent across all stratigraphic levels suggesting a strong basement control on faulting within this portion of the basin. The structural setting is char acterized as an isolated naturally fractured lacustrine carbonate reser voir. The main producing zones are in the Barra Velha Formation Aptian at depths of approximately 5 km. The stratigraphic zones are called in this study as zone A that underlies the salt sequence and it is above zone B that is positioned on the top of the rift sequence. Corresponding author. Petrobras EDISA, Rua Marque s de Herval, 90. Santos, SP, 11010-310, Brazil. E-mail address anatanaka petrobras.com.br A.P. Burgoa Tanaka . https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2021.105392 Received 27 April 2021 Received in revised form 1 October 2021 Accepted 19 October 2021 Available online 21 October 2021 0264-8172 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. A.P. Burgoa Tanaka et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 135 2022 105392 Fig. 1. A Location of the study area in the Santos Basin External High modified from Carminatti et al., 2009 . B Zoom shows the structural map of the reservoir top for the studied area, with traces of interpreted faults. Fig. 2. Stereogram of the seismic faults. A Pole density of the mean attitude of the seismic faults. B Poles of all knots attitude of the seismic faults. 2. Fracture modeling workflow The first step of the fracture modeling workflow is the structural seismic interpretation over an area of approximately 250 km2. The seismic scale fault network is defined by normal faults in an en-echelon pattern with mean strike of 027 and 60 of mean dip Fig. 2 , crosscut by NW-SE and WNW-ESE steeply dipping subseismic faults localized in softlinkage and relay zones within the main faults. Second step is the borehole acoustic and resistivity image logs interpretation of 21 wells, totalizing 1348 fractures and faults. Struc tures can be distinguished by their geometries, petrophysical properties and stratigraphic position. Fig. 3 illustrates examples of fractures interpretation as sinusoidal of low amplitude that crosscut the bedding, in acoustic images. The third step is the definition of fracture sets and calculation of fracture intensity logs for each set, corrected using the borehole devia tion Terzaghi, 1965 . In image logs Fig. 4 , 66 of interpreted frac tures had strikes of 010 080, parallel to the main NE-SW seismic faults, and 34 with strikes of 100 170, totalizing 1032 measurements of extensional and shear fractures. Two major fracture sets were recog nized, one set is NE-SW with the mean strike of 040 and the mean dip of Fig. 3. Low amplitude fractures interpreted in acoustic borehole image, frac ture highlighted in green and bedding highlighted in red A interpreted static image, B interpreted dynamic image, and C dynamic image without inter pretation. Well diameter is 8 1 2 . For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. 2 A.P. Burgoa Tanaka et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 135 2022 105392 values. Zone A upper zone has mean intensity of 0.12 and is less fractured than Zone B that has mean intensity of 0.24 Table 1 . Higher mean fracture intensity values present in Zone B are probably related to the structural position, closer to seismic faults, rather than to the me chanical stratigraphy. Extensional fault displacements, as observed in seismic scale by Carminatti et al. 2009 in the Santos Basin, are the main control on sub seismic faults and fractures distribution observed in the wells. In the structural domains, the Southern and the shelf areas are the less fractured with mean fracture well intensities of 0.06 and 0.07, respectively. The highest mean intensity values 0.32 are observed in the wells of the Northern domain. The NE-SW fractures are the most abundant and predominantly fault-related. The NW-SE fractures are more likely to occur in damage zones between adjacent faults near fault tips and soft-linkage zones, as observes in the Zone A of the well-6 Fig. 5 . The fifth step is validating the conceptual model with the data analysis. The NE-SW discontinuities were distributed along corridors across the reservoir section and extend horizontally for tens to hundreds of meters. The NW-SE fractures were distributed locally as structures associated to linkage zones and relay ramps Larsen, 1988 Peacock and Sanderson, 1994 . Those NW-SE fractures, when located nearby the tips of normal faults, are also regarded as part of transference zones Morley et al., 1990 , or accommodation zones Rosendahl et al., 1986 . Ac cording to Peacock and Sanderson 1994 the relay ramps of the area can be classified between the stages 2 and 3 due to the throw transference and linkage between overstepping faults. Stage 2 is when the adjacent faults start to interact, but they do not join, the displacement is trans ferred between the faults by rotation of the relay ramp about an axis that is approximately perpendicular to the fault planes. Stage 3 is the stage of fracture development, when the fractures start to link overstepping segments, cutting across the relay ramp and connecting the two fault segments, although maintaining the relay ramp geometry. Structural analysis of a relay ramp in Canyonlands National Park, Utah, shows that fractures are transversal to the main N S normal faults in relay ramp structure Fossen et al., 2010 , being a potential surface analogous for this sub-surface case study, despite to the geometry of fractures and ramps Fig. 6 . For the studied area, it is possible to suggest that the occurrence of relay ramps strongly affects the top of the Fig. 4. Stereograms and rose diagrams of the fractures interpreted in borehole image logs. A Poles density. B Fracture strikes. C Fracture dips. Line 1 Set1. Line 2 Set2. 67, and the other set is NW-SE with mean strike of 223 and the mean dip of 68. Step four consists in relating fractures intensities and orientation through structural analysis by stratigraphic zone, considering the zones A and B, and by structural domains, considering southern, central, northern, and shelf domains Fig. 5 . Stereograms were plotted for each well, the poles were plotted on the lower hemisphere and the mean at titudes are considered as the best-fit pole. The domains were defined according to the fracture intensity, the limits were based in seismic interpretation of the depositional setting limits and basement structural trend. Arithmetic means were calculated using the total intensity fracture log by stratigraphic zone to verify which zone is more fractured. The original unit of measure is the number of fractures per meter, but all values were normalized relative to the most fractured well zone A and B in well-11 represent respectively 1.59 and 3.04 fractures m , the aim is to compare relative intensities between wells regardless the absolute Fig. 5. A Structural domains, faults and well location. B Stereograms plotted for zone A. C Stereograms plotted for zone B. 3 A.P. Burgoa Tanaka et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 135 2022 105392 Table 1 Depositional setting, structural domains, and mean relative fracture intensity by well and stratigraphic zone. Depositional Setting Structural Domain Well PLATFORM NORTH 11 20 21 2 13 17 12 Total 18 8 4 14 6 1 10 Total 9 7 Total 15 5 16 3 18 Total Total CENTRAL SOUTH SHELF ALL SETTINGS AND DOMAINS EAST Relative intensity reservoir top of the zone A , since the seismic fault-related structures are more likely to affect the lower reservoir levels. The following step is the generation of fracture drivers in the 3D model. The distribution of the NE-SW fracture set, that represents the damage zones of the main seismic faults, is controlled by the total fault displacement strain. Fault-related strain was used in the DFN model as a fracture driver to distribute NE-SW fractures within fracture corridors surrounding fault planes, representing damage zones. The attribute total strain is a product of an Elastic Dislocation forward model Fig. 7 . This simulation considers the host rock as an isotropic and elastic medium, where fractures and subseismic faults are formed according to displacement constrains and to the Griffith-Mohr-Coulomb rupture criteria Dee et al., 2007 . In order to distribute the NW-SE fractures in relay ramps, a combination of a conceptual area of ramp occurrence and the seismic attribute vector azimuth was used. The vector-azimuth attribute is part of the automatic fault extraction workflow that uses the coherence volume as an input that results in a vector volume that contains azimuth information Fig. 7 . The E-W and N S azimuths were filtered to attenuate noises that correspond to the seismic acquisition direction. ZONE A ZONE B ZONES A B 0.52 0.03 0.02 0.22 0.25 0.47 0.01 0.22 0.17 0.20 0.06 0.09 0.11 0.01 0.06 0.10 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.13 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.04 0.12 1.00 0.47 0.02 0.26 0.47 0.53 0.21 0.42 0.38 0.29 0.06 0.18 0.38 0.00 0.25 0.22 0.00 0.18 0.09 0.29 0.01 0.00 0.18 0.00 0.10 0.25 0.76 0.25 0.02 0.24 0.36 0.50 0.11 0.32 0.27 0.25 0.06 0.13 0.24 0.01 0.16 0.16 0.02 0.11 0.06 0.16 0.07 0.00 0.12 0.00 0.07 0.18 The last steps consist in the DFN building using the intensity logs and fault-related parameters defined previously. Two sets were used to generate the fracture intensity logs. Set 1 contemplates the NE-SW fractures which intensity correlates with the strain and set 2 contem plates the NW-SW fractures which intensity correlates with the relay ramp position. The fracture intensity logs were kriged with each corre spondent secondary variable, generating three tridimensional proper ties, and P32 fracture densities used as input for the DFN stochastic simulation. Last step is upscaling fracture properties such as sigma, fracture porosity, length, and permeability in three directions for the flow simulation Fig. 8 . The fracture properties upscaling is based in Oda method 1985 which requires a 3D grid built with the seismic inter pretation and stratigraphic zonation, as described in Tanaka et al. 2018 . The maximum value of simulated permeability was calibrated with a lower tested interval of a naturally fractured well. The fracture properties were combined with matrix properties and simulated in a DPDK flow model for history matching. To compare the static fracture properties with the dynamic proper ties, the oil flow production logging tool - PLT and the pressure tests Fig. 6. A The structural map of zone A top, indicating the high, faults and its relay ramps. B Relay ramp in Utah, USA Google Earth 08 2017 as an analog area for the study. 4 A.P. Burgoa Tanaka et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 135 2022 105392 Fig. 7. A Total strain map for zone A. B Vector azimuth attribute for a general slice. Fig. 8. Section W-E illustrating the intensity and DFN for each family NE-SW and NW-SE followed by the upscale results fracture porosity and permeability . MDT were plotted for each well together with gamma ray, effective porosity from nuclear magnetic resonance NMR , fracture interpreta tion, and intensity logs Fig. 9 . For most of the wells, the PLT is posi tioned only at a short interval in zone A, as MDT are simpler and more common data acquired, a depletion log was created from the pressure points registered, and the scale was extrapolated to evaluate the small differences from point to point at different depths and to verify where the fractures contribute for depletion and fluid flow. Pressure for well-11 Figs. 5 and 9 was registered in the moment when only well-1 Fig. 5 was producing, therefore it is possible to observe that there is a strong communication between the producer in the south and the extreme north of the area, distant approximately 19 5 A.P. Burgoa Tanaka et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 135 2022 105392 The DPDK formulation is essential to characterize permeability an isotropies and great permeability values in a geological coherent way for the case study, there was no necessity of applying permeability multi plication at only one matrix cell direction, and it could be done to generate permeability anisotropy at a simple porosity and simple permeability simulation model. Permeabilities greater than 10D can also be better represented by the fracture cells rather than at matrix cells as high permeabilities should be given by fractures. The fracture cells also give more possibilities for the history matching, and some tests can only be adjusted due to fractures. The graph Fig. 10 represents the pro duction data dots of well-2, the fitted line is the pressure adjustment with the fracture modeling, whereas the line that does not fit represents a model without fractures. 3. Conclusion Fracture characterization and modeling as proposed in this work makes it possible to represent the preferential fluid flow path in a geological coherent manner, as non-matrix enhanced permeabilities and permeabilities anisotropies that are useful for this case study. Fracture modeling is not a standardized activity, therefore the authors encourage iteration between steps for quality check, as many times as necessary, to incorporate dynamic data to the modeling, resulting in an adequate history match. This methodology can be used for reservoir management and production of naturally fractured carbonate reservoirs to generate accurate production curves. Fig. 9. Well-11 logs. Track1 Gamma ray. Track 2 Effective porosity NMR . Track 3 Production log test PLT . Track 4 Fractures tadpoles. Track 5 Fracture intensity. Track 6 Depletion from pretests MDT . Depth and log values can be considered relatives. km. If such communication was only due to the stratigraphical permoporosity characteristics, depletion and PLT data inside zone A should match the variations in mean porosity Fig. 9 . The effective porosity alone does not explain the intervals where there is more production. In the other hand, the fracture intensity logs, and effective porosity show better correlation with the PLT data. The greater depletion at zone B can be explained by the high concentration of fractures at the same depth, corroborating the importance of the fractures for the fluid flow, specially at Zone B. The numeric flow model considered the DPDK formulation and the model was calibrated with MDT data of 21 wells and other dynamic data available, such as tests and production history. Interference data sug gests that there is strong horizontal permeability anisotropy Fig. 10 , where the NE-SW is the direction of greater permeabilities, coherent with the NE-SW fracture corridor. Well-13 was drilled right after the production start, distant approximately 14 km from the producing well1 at the south and shows depletion of 7 kgf cm3. Although well-17 was drilled before well-18, well-18 is closer to the first producer and there fore shows higher depletion. Author contribution Ana Paula Burgoa Tanaka Conceptualization, Data Curation, Methodology, and Writing-Original. Joa o Paulo Gomes Borges Conceptualization, Methodology, and Writing-Reviewing. Gabriel Cor rea de Matos Conceptualization, Writing-Reviewing and Editing. Jefter Natan de Moraes Caldeira Conceptualization Geology and Editing. Roge rio Brandi de Souza Conceptualization Geology . Maria Taryn Relvas Campos and Tatiana Alice Soares de Oliveira Conceptualization Geophisycs . Diogo Reato Marc on, Bruno Miranda Cunha and Ana Paula Martins Lima Conceptualization Engineering . Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Fig. 10. A Interference graph of depletion vs. time. The wells 13, 17 and 18 are plotted in the direction NE-SW. Pressure and time can be consider as relative values. B Well-2 cartesian pressure vs. time, the dots are the real production data, the blue line is the model with fractures and green line is the model without fractures. Pressure and time can be considered as relative values. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. 6 A.P. Burgoa Tanaka et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 135 2022 105392 Acknowledgement with implications for hydrocarbon migration and accumulation. AAPG Bull. 94 5 , 597 613. Gomes, P.O., Kilsdonk, B., Minken, J., Grow, T., Barragan, R., 2012. Tectonic evolution of the outer high of Santos Basin, southern sao paulo plateau, Brazil, and implications for hydrocarbon exploration. In Gao, D. Ed. , Tectonics and Sedimentation Implications for Petroleum Systems, vol. 100. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Memoir, pp. 125 142, 2012. Larsen, P., 1988. Relay structures in a Lower Permian basement-involved extension system, East Greenland. J. Struct. Geol. 10 1 , 3 8. Morley, C.K., Nelson, R.A., Patton, T.L., 1990. Transfer zones in the East African rift system and their relevance to hydrocarbon exploration in rifts. AAPG Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull. 74, 1234 1253. Oda, M., 1985. Permeability tensor for discontinuous rock masses. Geotechnique 35 4 , 483 495. Peacock, D.C.P., Sanderson, D.J., 1994. Geometry and development of relay ramps in normal fault systems. AAPG Bull. 78 2 , 147 165. Rosendahl, B.R., Reynolds, D.J., Lorber, P.M., Burgess, C.F., McGill, J., Scott, D.L., Lambiase, J.J., Derksen, S.J., 1986. Structural expressions of rifting lessons from lake tanganyika, africa. In Frostick, L.E., Renaut, R.W., Reid, I., Tiercelin, J.J. Eds. , Sedimentation in the African Rifts Spec, vol. 25. Publ. geol. Soc., pp. 29 43 Tanaka, A.P., Faria, D., Gomes, J.P., de Souza Jr., O., 2018. Geological Characterization and Modeling of an Aptian Carbonate Reservoir in the Santos Basin, Brazil. AAPG Search and Discovery Article, p. 11128. https www.searchanddiscovery.com pd fz documents 2018 11128tanaka ndx tanaka.pdf.html. Terzaghi, R.D., 1965. Sources of error in joint surveys. Geotechnique 15 3 , 287 304. The authors acknowledge Petrobras for the permission to publish this study. Thanks, Rita Pozzi, for the first approach and advice on the fracture modeling. Thanks Walter Becker, Mariana Torquato, Ramiro Ramos, and Carlos Henrique Bruhn for the suggestions and encourage ment to develop this study. Thanks Fiona Whitaker, for the advice and suggestions. References Carminatti, M., Dias, J.L., Wolf, B., 2009. From Turbidites to Carbonates Breaking Paradigms in Deep Waters. Offshore Technology Conference This Paper Was Prepared for Presentation at the 2009 Offshore Technology Conference Held in Houston, pp. 4 7. Texas, USA May 2009. Dee, S.J., Yielding, G., Freeman, B., Healy, D., Kusznir, N.J., Grant, N., Ellis, P., Lonergan, L., Jolly, R.J.H., Rawnsley, K., Sanderson, D.J., 2007. Elastic dislocation modelling for prediction of small-scale fault and fracture network characteristics. In Fractured Reservoirs, vol. 270. Geological Society of London, Special Publication, pp. 139 155. Fossen, H., Schultz, R.A., Rundhovde, E., Rotevatn, A., Buckley, S.J., 2010. Fault linkage and graben stepovers in the Canyonlands Utah and the North Sea Viking Graben, 7

[END_OF_PAPER]

Marine and Petroleum Geology 161 2024 106700 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Marine and Petroleum Geology journal homepage www.elsevier.com locate marpetgeo Unravelling the origin of reworked deposits in Aptian lacustrine carbonate reservoirs of the Santos Basin, SE Brazil Renato Sol Paiva de Medeiros b, , Mateus Basso b, Guilherme F. Chinelatto b, Marcus Vini cius Theodoro Soares b, Gabriela F. Matheus b, Juan Francisco Villacreses Morales b, Luiza de Carvalho Mendes b, Alexandre Campane Vidal a, b a b Department of Geology and Natural Resources, Geosciences Institute IG , University of Campinas Unicamp , Campinas, SP 13083-855, Brazil Center for Energy and Petroleum Studies CEPETRO , University of Campinas Unicamp , Campinas, SP 13083-970, Brazil A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T Keywords Reworked facies Shallow lake Barra velha formation Facies analysis The Barra Velha Formation, representing the uppermost Aptian formation of the Santos Basin, predominantly comprises dolomudstones, intraclastic grainstones, and rudstones. Additionally, spherulitic and Mg-rich clay stones suggest deposition in a shallow alkaline lacustrine environment. Despite the significance of reworked deposits within the Barra Velha Formation, limited attention has been given to understanding their origin, provenance, and their link to high well productivity. This study aims to characterize the reworked carbonate facies and establish their diverse genesis using a multi-scale approach. Through the analysis of core samples retrieved from the upper 19 m of the Upper Barra Velha Formation, we identified eight sedimentary facies, including microfacies grouped into two distinct associations back-barrier deposits and foreshore-shoreface transition deposits. Back-barrier deposits consist of shrubstones, laminated shrubby spherulitestone, laminated mudstone, massive grainstone, and massive rudstone facies, composed of in situ facies and carbonates reworked by wave and distal hyper-concentrated flow. Foreshore-shoreface transition deposits comprise laminated grainstone, pebble grainstone, and massive rudstone. The facies analyses provide insights into swash-backwash effects, hyper-concentrated flow, and high wave reworking deposits. Detailed interpretation of seismic reflectors in the Uppermost interval of Barra Velha Formation revealed two distinct geometric patterns high-amplitude onlapping seismic reflectors toward the basement and bidirectional high-amplitude reflectors on the platform edge. These patterns primarily consist of spherulitestones, shrubstones, and grainstones-packstones BHI facies. Gravity flow deposits of a fan-delta in the Lowermost interval of the Barra Velha Formation were interpreted as rudstones-grainstones and mixed reworked carbonates volcanic rocks BHI facies, associated with low-amplitude sheet-like shape reflectors dipping toward the slope seismic reflectors. Based on the constructed onlap curve derived from the seismic lines in the study area and the described facies associations, it is evident that the lake margins are expanding, conducive to the formation of reworked facies mainly associated with wave action. 1. Introduction Numerous published studies have focused on the origin, petrophys ical characteristics, and conceptual geological models of these carbon ates. The Itapema Formation deposits have been described as coquinas and shales Moreira et al., 2007 Carlotto et al., 2017 Chinelatto et al., 2020 Oliveira et al., 2021 . Conversely, the carbonates of the Barra Velha Formation BVF , the focus of this study, are primarily described as in situ deposits comprising three key components shrubs, spherulites, and mud. Additionally, reworked deposits and mudstones have been identified Wright and Barnett, 2015 Gomes et al., 2020 Barnett et al., 2021 Rebelo et al., 2022 Carvalho et al., 2022 Basso et al., 2022 . The discovery of Brazilian pre-salt reservoirs stands out as one of the most significant achievements of petroleum exploration in recent de cades. Since their discovery, considerable efforts have been dedicated to enhancing production, which accounted for over 2 Mboe d of national oil production in 2023 Age ncia Nacional do Petro leo - ANP . Among the crucial regions in this context is the Santos Basin, located in southeastern Brazil, where the lacustrine carbonate deposits of the Itapema and Barra Velha formations Barremian and Aptian the primary reservoirs. Corresponding author. E-mail addresses renato.solgeo gmail.com, renatome unicamp.br R.S.P. de Medeiros . https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2024.106700 Received 12 June 2023 Received in revised form 2 January 2024 Accepted 5 January 2024 Available online 6 January 2024 0264-8172 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. R.S.P. de Medeiros et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 161 2024 106700 Although previous works on the pre-salt reservoirs have acknowl edged the presence of reworked deposits in the Barra Velha Formation, geological modeling efforts have primarily focused on the in situ facies given their complexity and the absence of a suitable analog. Recent studies have emerged specifically examining the origin of reworked deposits Barnett et al., 2018, 2021 . However, the interpretation of depositional characteristics, structural and stratigraphic evolution, and the conceptual model of deposition across different scales remains largely unexplored. Understanding the origin and distribution of reworked deposits within a reservoir is of utmost importance as they can result from diverse depositional settings, giving rise to distinct textural fabrics that influ ence petrophysical characteristics and ultimately impact reservoir quality. In lacustrine systems, facies variations are associated with fac tors such as lake depth, water chemistry, shoreline morphology, and fetch Platt and Wright, 1991 McGlue et al., 2010 Nutz et al., 2018 , which control the energy regime of the environment and determine the occurrence of reworked deposits. Furthermore, the occurrence of faults can induce the formation of reworked sediments, adding more complexity to the system. The carbonates of the BVF were deposited during the transition from the rift to the sag phase, leading to notable fluctuations in lake morphology and water levels, resulting in distinct facies associations and lateral distribution within the basin Minzoni et al., 2020 . In this context, our study proposes an integrated approach that combines in terpretations derived from seismic data, borehole image logs, core samples, and thin sections to investigate the key characteristics and evidence of reworked facies in a pre-salt field within the Santos Basin. The primary objective is to elucidate the nature of these reworked de posits, their relationship with in situ deposits, and their correlation with the structural and depositional evolution of the BVF from the sag phase of the basin. This research represents a significant advancement in un derstanding the geological history of the BVF, shedding light on the complexities of sedimentary processes and providing insights for future exploration and reservoir management endeavors. The sedimentary sequence of the BVF was initially interpreted as biogenic in origin due to the recognition of microbial carbonate facies associated with grainstones, packstones, and shales deposited in lacus trine environment Moreira et al., 2007 Terra et al., 2010 Mann and Rigg, 2012 Saller et al., 2016 Ceraldi and Green, 2016 . However, other authors, such as Wright and Barnett 2015 , present different models and describe a chemical abiotic model in shallow evaporitic lakes with the occurrence of cyclic depositions. Additional models, such as the evaporitic model Farias et al., 2019 , depict evaporitic sedimentation patterns in endorheic basins, while the travertine model Erthal et al., 2017 indicates the formation of different morphotypes of travertine systems under various hydrothermal and environmental conditions. 2. Geological setting 3.2. Borehole image log interpretation The Pre-Salt sequence in the South Atlantic has its genesis linked to the separation of South America and Africa during the Cretaceous breakup of the western Gondwana Aslanian et al., 2009 Moulin et al., 2010 . The Santos Basin, located in the southeast of Brazil, is the most prolific hydrocarbon producer in the Brazilian pre-salt province. It is separated from the Pelotas Basin by the Floriano polis High to the south and from the Campos Basin by the Cabo Frio High to the north. The sedimentary record of the Santos Basin comprises three phases, broadly identified as the Rift approximately 138 123 million years ago My , Post-rift or sag approximately 123 113 My , and Drift approximately 113 0 My Moreira et al., 2007 . The Rift Supersequence, as described by Moreira et al. 2007 , includes the Camboriu , Pic arras, and Itapema formations. The Guaratiba Group belong to the Post-Rift Supersequence, charac terized as continental and marginal deposits Moreira et al., 2007, Fig. 1 . The evaporites of the Ariri Formation, primarily composed of halite and anhydrite, were deposited over the Barra Velha Formation forming a regional seal for the petroleum system Moreira et al., 2007 . The Aptian BVF is internally divided by the Intra-Alagoas uncon formity, which separates the Lower Barra Velha below from the Upper Barra Velha above Wright and Barnett, 2015 Gomes et al., 2020 Minzoni et al., 2020 . The thickness of this formation can vary from over 500 m at the depocenter to less than 25 m on fault block highs, and may even be locally absent Barnett et al., 2018 . Minzoni et al. 2020 subdivided this formation based on seismic stratigraphic architecture, identifying the BVE 300 interval for the Lower BVF, below the Intra-Alagoas Unconformity, and the BVE 200 and BVE 100 intervals for the Upper BVF. The base of the BVE200 corresponds to high-amplitude peak reflectors associated with a transgressive surface above. Borehole image tools BHI create images of the borehole walls based on different physical properties, such as acoustic impedance or electrical resistivity Lai et al., 2018 . To characterize the facies of the non-cored intervals of well SB-E1, an approach based on acoustic image log facies analysis was employed, following the guidelines proposed by Lai et al. 2018 and Basso et al. 2022 . This approach identifies visual image characteristics such as color scheme, image texture, and dip patterns. Additionally, other data sources were considered for facies and compositional analysis in non-cored intervals, including photomicro graphs from sidewall cores, rock analysis reports, and complementary conventional and special logs. Acoustic image logs covering a depth of 285 m were interpreted using the Interactive Petrophysics software Lloyd s Register at a high-resolution visualization scale of 1 10. A total of 322 bedding planes were interpreted for the BVF, providing detailed information on bedding orientation for the well. 3. Methods The studied well SB-E1 have approximately 295 m of the Barra Velha Formation in the Santos Basin however, the cored interval was restricted to the uppermost 19 m of the formation Fig. 2 . To over come the limited sampling, a multi-data and multi-scale approach was employed. The methodology included 1 petrology and petrography of core samples, 2 analysis of borehole image logs BHI facies, and 3 interpretation of 3D seismic data. 3.1. 3D seismic data A post-stack seismic volume in depth was used for this study, with crossline and inline separations of 18.5 18.5 m and an inline orien tation of N S. The seismic data is presented in accordance with the SEG American convention, where a peak with positive amplitude represents an acoustic impedance increment blue on seismic sections . The dominant wavenumber ranges between 0.005 m-1 and 0.007 m-1, and the velocity at the reservoir depth is approximately 4500 m s, resulting in a vertical resolution of approximately 50 m. The seismic data was interpreted in the vicinity of well SB-E1 to support and contextualize the geological characterization performed at the core and well log scales. 3.3. Petrology and petrography The geological description of core samples from well SB-E1 is the primary focus of this work. Roughly 19 m of core samples from the uppermost interval of the well were described, representing approxi mately 14 of the formation thickness Fig. 2 . One hundred seventeen thin sections of the cored interval were dyed with Alizarin Red S 0.2 g 100 mL of 1.5 HCl and examined to distinguish between calcite and dolomite following the method proposed by Dickson 1966 . We con ducted a comprehensive analysis of the constituent components within each rock, including matrix, cement, bioclasts, siliciclastic grains, and pores. To accurately determine the constituent percentages, a 2 R.S.P. de Medeiros et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 161 2024 106700 meticulous 300-point count was performed on every thin section. To classify microfacies within carbonate rocks, we adopted the criteria set forth by Gomes et al. 2020 . Additionally, we considered the diagenetic obliteration criteria as outlined by Lokier and Al Junaibi 2016 . In this study, we employed two distinct classifications to construct strati graphic columns. The first classification, based on the Terra et al. 2010 system, primarily focuses on in situ facies identification by assessing the dimensions of shrubs and spherulites. This classification categorizes Fig. 1. A The Santos Basin is located on the southeastern Brazilian coast, showing the pre-salt province polygon and the approximate location of the Well SB-E1. B A seismic crossline with the studied well positioned in the Santos Basin. C Chronostratigraphic chart for the Santos Basin highlighting the Barra Velha Formation modified from Moreira et al., 2007 . 3 R.S.P. de Medeiros et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 161 2024 106700 Fig. 2. The cored intervals of Well SB-E1 are positioned on the seismic cross-section, indicating a gap in cored section, BHI data studied, plugs, and thin sections. sizes as follows Very small 0.2 cm , Small 0.2 0.5 cm , Medium 0.5 1.5 cm , and Big 1.5 cm . The second classification, derived from the work of Lokier and Al Junaibi 2016 , was mainly utilized to enhance our understanding of allochthonous carbonates. lower part of the cored interval, accounting for approximately 74.6 of the studied succession Fig. 3 parts 1 and 2 . It mainly comprises de posits dominated by textural components within the spherulite-shrub facies. A stacking pattern was observed at the base of FA1, character ized by distinct shrub morphologies at the bottom, with less developed forms e.g., pustular, dendriform grading towards more complex mor phologies at the top e.g., arborescent, fan, and crust . This facies transitions into finer spherulitestone facies or finer-grained grainstones, which rework the facies at the top see Fig. 3 part 1 . In the more basal succession, there is a predominance of shrubstones forming thicker layers 0.3 1 m . However, these facies become less common and thinner 0.05 0.1 cm towards the top. At the top of FA1, the stacking pattern is characterized by basal rudstones grading into grainstones, frequently reworked by subsequent sedimentation. Erosive basal con tacts are predominate Fig. 3 part 2 . The uppermost portion of the sampled core is primarily composed of 4. Results 4.1. Core description facies association The SB-E1 well provides approximately 19 m of core samples distributed within an almost continuous interval representing the up permost interval. Nine sedimentary facies were identified and grouped into two facies associations FA . These groups include FA1 backbarrier deposits, and FA2 foreshore-shoreface transition deposits Fig. 3 parts 1, 2, and 3 . Notably, the lithological unit FA2 is observed to overlay the underlying unit FA1. The FA1 is primarily present in the 4 R.S.P. de Medeiros et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 161 2024 106700 Fig. 3. Part 1 This stratigraphic column illustrates the geological composition of the last 19 m of the studied sedimentary log obtained from well SB-E1 within the Barra Velha Formation. Each sample core box depicted in the diagram corresponds to an approximate depth interval of 1 m. The depicted interval boxes 37 to 32 corresponds to the FA1 - Shallow Lake Deposits. Refer to the legend provided for a detailed interpretation of the symbols and units used in this illustration. part 2. This stratigraphic column illustrates the geological composition of the last 19 m of the studied sedimentary log obtained from well SB-E1 within the Barra Velha Formation. Notably, there is a stratigraphic gap of 16.5 m between boxes 30 and 11. Each sample core box depicted in the diagram corresponds to an approximate depth interval of 1 m. The depicted interval boxes 31 to 08 corresponds to the FA1 - Shallow Lake Deposits. Refer to the legend provided for a detailed interpretation of the symbols and units used in this illustration. part 3. This stratigraphic column provides an overview of the geological composition of the final 19 m within the analyzed sedimentary log extracted from well SBE1, situated within the Barra Velha Formation. Each sample core box depicted in the diagram corresponds to an approximate depth interval of 1 m. The highlighted section encompasses the FA2 - Lake-Shore deposits, represented by boxes 07 to 01. For a comprehensive explanation of the symbols and units employed in this illustration, please refer to the accompanying legend. FA2, accounting for 25.4 of this interval see Fig. 3, Part 3 . This section is characterized by a distinct stacking pattern, with FA2 con sisting of massive rudstones transitioning to grainstones with rounded pebbles, featuring plane-parallel to low-angle cross-lamination. Claes et al. 2017 , including factors such as size and the length width ratio of shrubs. These criteria directly influence the shape and lateral continuity of each shrub element. In the studied succession, the following morphologies were recognized i pustular, ii arborescent, iii dendritic dendriform, iv crust, and v irregular. These mor phologies are described as having a stacking pattern with progressively larger shrubs at the top, creating a type of inverse grading. This bedding pattern begins with pustular morphologies, gradually transitioning to arborescent or dendritic dendriform forms, and culminates in crust forms within a complete high-frequency cycle refer to Fig. 4 . The pustular shrubs exhibit a size range between 1 mm and 5 mm, featuring sub-rounded shapes with an irregular surface and a slight preferential vertical growth Fig. 4A . They typically have a height-towidth ratio of approximately 1 1. Arborescent shrubs branch upward to form structures that are 10 mm in height, with their height being larger than their width, resembling miniature trees Fig. 4B and C . Dendritic dendriform shrubs, ranging between 7 and 10 mm, are characterized by a branching structure, where the height is significantly larger than the width Fig. 4D . Crust shrubs, with heights ranging from 7 to 10 mm, are macroscopically defined by laterally coalesced ele ments, forming laminated bands of densely packed shrub-like structures that develop perpendicular to the substratum Fig. 4D . Irregular shrubs, not previously described in Claes et al. 2017 , are classified in the absence of direct relationships with distinguishable shrub elements. 4.1.1. Back-barrier deposits - FA1 The facies association 1 occurs at the lowerrmost part of the studied interval and constitute a c. 12 m thick coarsening-upward sequence, comprises from the base to the top, by the following facies i shrub stones, ii laminated shrubby spherulitestone, iii laminated mudstone, iv massive grainstone, and v massive rudstone see Fig. 3 parts 1, and 2 . 4.1.1.1. Shrubstones SH . The Shrubstones facies is characterized by tabular layers with a thickness ranging from 10 to 50 cm. These layers exhibit a depositional contact with grainstones or laminated shrubby spherulitestone at the base and frequent erosional contacts with grain stones at the top. Thin, wavy clay laminations are often associated with the lower part of these facies. This pattern of intercalating shrubstone with clay lamination, shrubstone, and grainstone is consistently preva lent throughout the entire facies association. The SH facies displays elevated porosity and pervasive silicification, resulting in the formation of horizontal layers that fill porosity and replace shrubs. Various shrub morphologies have been described based on the criteria established by 5 R.S.P. de Medeiros et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 161 2024 106700 Fig. 3. continued . They are characterized by variable sizes between 8 and 15 mm and have a variable height-to-width ratio Fig. 4E . The petrographic analysis of the SH facies has identified two distinct microfacies shrubstone and spherulitic shrubstone. These microfacies are differentiated based on the proportion of in-situ spherulites. Within these microfacies, various micromorphologies such as pustular, den dritic, and fan are recognized, with sizes ranging from 0.25 mm to 8.5 mm, grading towards the top of the microfacies see Fig. 5A E . Accessory minerals within these microfacies include sulfides and phosphates. Dolomitization is prevalent, leading to the replacement and modifi cation of shrub edges with xenotopic hypidiotopic microcrystalline dolomite, and porosity filling with sparry dolomite Fig. 5A and D . Silicification occurs later and to a lesser extent than dolomitization, primarily manifesting as microcrystalline cement that replaces particle edges, fills porosity, and selectively or non-selectively replaces rock fabric elements. The observed porosities were intercrystalline pores situated between microcrystalline and sparse dolomite cement. Vuggy pores are commonly found in association with calcite relict Fig. 5A . Growth framework pores are observed among crystal shrubs and their branches. Additionally, intra-aggregate intra-shrub porosity is characterized by micropores irregularly dispersed throughout the shrub or aligned along internal structures, such as growth bands and radial crystals. 4.1.1.1.1. Depositional process. While the growth patterns of shrubs are primarily described in a lacustrine environment with limited hy drothermal influence, several similarities with classical deposits have been identified, particularly in the morphology-growth relationships and physical and chemical properties of the environment cf. Claes et al., 2017 . Moreover, the transition from smaller, less branched shrubs, exhibiting poorly developed morphologies e.g., pustular, arbustiform, arborescent , to larger shrubs with lateral continuity e.g., crust or crustiform may reflect a gradual increase in water flow rate. This in crease in water flow rate favors pCO2 degassing, pH elevation, and subsequent carbonate precipitation Erthal et al., 2017 . It is noteworthy that the crustiform morphology described here ex hibits similarities with classic travertine crusts Pentecost, 2005 Erthal et al., 2017 . However, it is distinct in that it has a maximum thickness of a few decimeters and resembles a set of laterally agglutinated dendritic shrubs rather than metric crystalline crusts with well-defined internal laminations. These irregular crustiform shrubs form on a soft, clayey substrate with a high water-to-sediment ratio, promoting deformation. Similar irregular forms with internal crenulated lamination have been described by Chafetz and Guidry 1999 as a product of both bacterially induced and abiotic precipitation. 4.1.1.2. Laminated shrubby spherulitestone SSl . The laminated shrubby spherulitestone facies, with a thickness ranging from 0.3 to 0.4 m, overlays the SH facies with a depositional contact and is overlain by grainstones with an erosive contact or shrubstone with depositional contact. This facies exhibits plane-parallel to wavy lamination and often contains thin wavy clay lenses. At millimeter to centimeter scales, there are high-frequency intercalations of shrubs and spherulites, which may be macroscopically indistinguishable. Within this facies, thin layers of 6 R.S.P. de Medeiros et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 161 2024 106700 Fig. 3. continued . shrubstones exhibit poorly developed pustular morphologies, varying in size from 0.25 mm to 0.7 mm with irregular shapes. Fig. 4F . The petrographic analysis of SSl reveals various in situ spherulite morphologies, including spherical, polygonal, elliptical, and coalesced hybrid forms , with sizes ranging from 0.1 to 0.5 mm see Fig. 5H . Spherulitestones in this microfacies are associated with remnants of laminated clay, dolomite bridges, and sulfides see Fig. 5F and G . Cementation within these microfacies occurs through microcrystalline hypidiotopic dolomite and sparry calcite. The porosities include interaggregate and intra-aggregate. Intercrystalline porosity occurs be tween dolomite and calcite crystals, while vug porosity results from the dissolution of non-selective fabric elements. 4.1.1.2.1. Depositional process. In lacustrine phases featuring natu rally alkaline conditions, and elevated concentrations of Mg and SiO2 aq cations, we observe the chemical precipitation of a poorly crystal line, hydrated magnesium silicate gel in the deeper and calmer regions of the lake Wright and Tosca, 2016 . As the lake level decreases and the Mg Ca ratio in the solution changes due to the gel s precipitation, it creates favorable conditions for clay sedimentation and the nucleation of low-Mg calcite or aragonite. This leads to the formation of spherulites in the deeper sections of the lake Wright and Tosca, 2016 Chafetz et al., 2017 . Conversely, the shrubby interval is more frequent and exhibits more developed shrub-like morphologies due to increased water flow rates, CO2 degassing, and a rise in pH levels Erthal et al., 2017 . These favorable conditions for the development of shrubby intervals are pri marily identified in the lake s more marginal areas. High-frequency fluctuations in the lake s water level have played a significant role in creating favorable conditions for the formation of millimetric layers of shrubstones and spherulitestones. spherulitestone facies with a depositional contact, and they exhibit an erosional contact underlying massive rudstones Fig. 4E . Within these mudstones, diagenetic silica nodules are present, characterized by almond-shaped to rounded forms, ranging in size from 1 to 2 mm. Additionally, silica layers, with thickness varying between 1 and 3 mm, are often interspersed within these mudstones at the top of FA1. 4.1.1.3.1. Depositional process. Mudstones, as defined by Gomes et al. 2020 , are identified based on their mineralogical composition, which can include silica nodules, Mg-clay minerals, and or dolomite. The mudstone-claystone-laminite facies are the product of reworked sediments or sedimentation in the deeper regions of the lake. Wright and Barnett 2020 describe that Mg-clay mudstones associated with spherulites in the deeper parts of the lake serve as strong indicators of in-situ facies, just as the transition from laminated calcimudstone to spherulite-dominated lithologies strongly suggests that the facies have not undergone significant reworking. Flooding events occurring during periods of elevated humidity contribute to the rise in lake levels and result in the mixing of chemical stratifications. In these humid periods, a decrease in pH is observed, alongside the formation of silica nodules, as documented by Wright and Tosca in 2016. Additionally, there is an increased settling of clays in the deeper regions, as reported by Gomes et al. 2020 . 4.1.1.4. Massive grainstone Gm . The massive grainstone facies is observed in beds of decimetric thickness, ranging from 0.1 to 0.5 m. These beds are deposited in tabular layers with an erosive contact at the base and a depositional contact at the top, in association with the SH and SSl facies Fig. 4A and D . Diagenetic silica nodules are characterized by angular to subrounded shapes, varying in size from 1 to 10 mm. Addi tionally, frequent silica layers are present at the top of the facies, with thicknesses ranging between 2 and 5 mm. Petrographic analyses have facilitated the identification of three distinct microfacies i intraclast grainstone, ii spherulite grainstone, and iii shrub grainstone. These grainstones exhibit a fining-upward pattern concerning carbonate particles, encompassing silica nodules, 4.1.1.3. Laminated mudstone Ml . The laminated mudstone facies is observed in beds approximately 0.5 m thick ranging from 0.3 to 0.8 m , featuring discontinuous plane-parallel to wave lamination. These mud stones are deposited overlying shrubstones and laminated shrubby 7 R.S.P. de Medeiros et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 161 2024 106700 Fig. 4. Photographs of core samples representing the sedimentary facies i.e., SH, SSl, Ml, Gm, and Rfp related to FA1 yellow band . A The SH facies with pustular shrub morphology, showing an erosional surface at the top in contact with the Gm facies. B, C, and D The SH facies displaying a pattern of shrub morphology development toward the top of the facies, with less developed forms at the base, such as arborescent shrubs, transitioning to more developed forms at the top, such as dendriform and crust shrubs. E The SH facies with irregularly shaped shrubs, partially silicified and intercalated with the Ml facies. F The SSl facies exhibiting planeparallel to wavy lamination and high-frequency interlayering of shrubs and spherulites. G The Rfp facies with silicified carbonate tabular pebbles and crushed brown mud clasts aligned with the layer deposition. H Red arrows indicate erosional surfaces between successive sets of Rfp facies. shrub fragments, intraclast spherulitestones, and various forms of porosity. Within these grainstones, the shrubs present disarticulated and altered fragments, ranging in size from 0.5 to 1.3 mm Fig. 5I . In the lower portion of the profile, the basal grainstone microfacies exhibits larger and less altered shrub fragments Fig. 5J . Conversely, towards the upper portion, shrubs fragments become smaller, less frequent, and more altered. The Gm facies is primarily characterized by hypidiotopic and idiotopic dolomite cementation. The dolomitization process con tributes to the altered features observed in the Gm facies microfacies. 4.1.1.4.1. Depositional process. In the context of FA1, the massive grainstone facies can have two possible origins i transport and reworking by hyperconcentrated flow, and ii wave reworking. The i process is associated with the progressive deceleration of gravity flows, favoring the formation of waning flow deposits. This results in the sedimentation of increasingly finer facies, as discussed by Nemec and Steel 1984 . In this scenario, flows gradually decelerate upon entering the lake as hyperpycnal flows, leading to the dispersion of finer sedi ments in more distal regions. The ii process is controlled by high-frequency variations inthe lake level. Sporadic increases in lake level lead to reworking processes occurring at the fair-weather wave base, primarily at the top of the shrubstones, forming erosional surfaces. In this case, the origin of the 8 R.S.P. de Medeiros et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 161 2024 106700 Fig. 5. Petrographic photos illustrating the microfacies described in FA1. A Micromorphology of pustular-type shrubs e.g., SH Plain Polarized Light Image PPL . B, C, and D Variations of fan-type shrub micromorphology e.g., SH PPL . E Shrub micromorphology of the dendritic-type e.g., SH Crossed Polarized Light Image XPL . F Spherulitestone cemented by hypidiomorphic dolomite and bridged dolomite at the top e.g., SSl XPL . G Detail of dolomite bridge e.g., Lss PPL cf. Wright and Barnett, 2015 . H Detail of polygonal and spherical spherulite from spherulitestone e.g., SSl XPL . I Grainstone with highly altered shrub fragments indicated by the red arrow e.g., Gm PPL . J Grainstone with larger and less altered shrub fragments indicated by the red arrow e.g., Gm PPL . K Intraclast rudstone microfacies with carbonate intraclasts, showing low sorting and tightly packed grains e.g., Rfp XPL . L Spherulite rudstone microfacies with larger clasts 2 mm with angular shapes, surrounded by coalesced spherulites and spherical spherulites e.g., Rfp XPL . massive grainstone facies is influenced by external factors related to lake level fluctuations, contributing to its formation. Fig. 4G and H . Notably, these rudstones display a fining-upward pattern, with the largest clasts ranging from 0.1 to 0.2 m situated at the base of the set. The clasts themselves have angular and tabular shapes, resembling flat pebbles, and align with the layer deposition Fig. 4G . While carbonate clasts, particularly the tabular ones, domi nate, the largest and most angular clasts are often associated with silicified carbonate. Mudstone clasts are elongated and occasionally crushed, whereas grainstone and shrubstone clasts tend to be smaller 4.1.1.5. Flat pebble rudstone Rfp . The flat pebble rudstones present in approximately 0.5-m thick beds, ranging from 0.3 to 0.8 m. These beds either erosively or non-erosively cover the Gm facies or other sets of Rfp facies, and exhibit a gradual transition with the Gm facies at the top 9 R.S.P. de Medeiros et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 161 2024 106700 carbonate- and silica-rich layers. The provenance of the ruptile layers may be associated with mud-flat carbonates and or silica layers exposed to subaerial dehydration at lake margins e.g. Krainer and Spo tl, 1998 . Indeed, dehydration result in shrinkage and soft-sediment deformation of lacustrine silica-gels, leading to the formation of ruptile layers prone to fragmentation and later reworking Krainer and Spo tl, 1998 . Possibly, the reworking associates with episodes of more significant rainfall in the drainage area runoff, as outlined in previous studies cf. Pietzsch et al., 2018, Figs. 3 and 6B . In this case, the observed vertical stacking of several rudstone layers indicates several episodes of hyper concentrated flows entering the lake, suggesting a more humid period characterized by more frequent episodes of higher rainfall. The HCF events occur in different pulses, forming distinct amal gamated cycles that overlap, resulting in incomplete fining-upward cy cles, often eroded at the top by the reactivation of new flows. Interpretation The absence of marine records in the studied facies, along with radiogenic strontium data as a proxy described in Pietzsch et al. 2018 , corroborates the interpretation that the carbonate facies of the Barra Velha Formation, including FA1, were deposited in the context of a closed lake. The studied interval reveals a substantial number of in situ facies, predominantly the SH facies with diverse morphologies, providing evidence of high water alkalinity and ion concentration cf. Erthal et al., 2017 . The formation of shrubs in shallower conditions within this lake is directly associated with increased kinetic energy and CO2 degassing Erthal et al., 2017 . The shallow lake conditions are also supported by the reworking of the top of the SH and SSl facies by the Gm facies, attributed to fair-weather wave reworking, as well as hyper concentrated flow. The chemical conditions, characterized by high alkalinity and ion concentration in the lake, are strongly influenced by hydrothermal vents. In the Campos Basin, the impact of hydrothermal vents associated with volcanic activity on the mineralogical composition of talcstevensite has been emphasized by several authors Winter et al., 2007 Alvarenga et al., 2016 . Souza et al. 2018 have also highlighted the potential influence of hydrothermal inflows in the Santos Basin, contributing to the formation of travertine carbonate deposits. The hy pothesis of hydrothermal vents supplying essential elements for the development of shrubs and spherulites is supported. The inflow rates of and subangular. The rudstone facies displays microfacies variations in the pro portions of intraclasts, spherulites, shrub fragments, and sulfides. Based on these differences in proportions, two distinct microfacies have been identified i intraclast rudstone and ii spherulite rudstone. The intraclast rudstone microfacies is characterized by a prevalence of intraclasts, showing low sorting and tightly packed grains see Fig. 5K . Carbonate intraclasts, primarily dolomitized or silicified, dominate this microfacies and are mostly angular to sub-angular in shape. These intraclasts can also exhibit laminated textures, ranging in size from 0.25 to 7 mm. Mudstone clasts, elongated and deformed by compaction ranging from 0.4 mm to 2 mm , are also present and may be replaced by microcrystalline dolomite. On the other hand, the spherulite rudstone microfacies contains predominantly larger clasts 2 mm with angular shapes, surrounded by coalesced spherulites and spherical spherulites see Fig. 5L . Despite alteration, well-preserved shrub fragments with a fan morphology are found in the spherulite rudstone microfacies. Dolomite cement in this microfacies varies between microcrystalline hypidiotopic dolomite and sparry dolomite, replacing the grains. Silica cement, occurring in a microcrystalline form, fills the porosity and mainly replaces carbonate intraclasts. This microfacies exhibits the highest porosity and includes interparticle, intraparticle, intercrystal line, and vug pores. 4.1.1.5.1. Depositional process. At the top of FA1, the Rfp represents a basal erosive coarse rudstone resulting from hyper-concentrated flow HCF , as described by Nemec and Steel 1984 and Zavala 2020 . HCFs are high-density subaerial flows characterized by high sediment load. The presence of erosive base and normal grading likely indicates insipient turbulence. Turbulent flows are characterized by upward movement of clasts during this process, clasts are separated by density where heavier and denser particles settles first, resulting in a normal grading arrangement Mulder and Alexander, 2001 . However, the structureless character of the rudstone advocates to the rapid sedimen tation of high density flows which hinders the formation of sedimentary structures Nemec and Steel, 1984 . In fact, the coexistence of high density flows with insipient turbulence might suggest a hyper concentrated flow behaviour sensu Mulder and Alexander 2001 . As observed in the Rpf facies, some of these reworked rudstones may contain flat pebbles, likely associated with the reworking of ruptile Fig. 6. 2D schematic models showing the transport and deposition of FA1. A Fair-weather waves shatter particles, producing ooids. B Hyper-concentrated flow entering the shallow lake. 10 R.S.P. de Medeiros et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 161 2024 106700 these hydrothermal systems vary over time, leading to changes in water saturation and the depositional relationships of these facies Karner and Gamboa, 2007 Reston, 2010 Pietzsch et al., 2018 . Besides the influ ence of lacustrine hydrothermal vents, which supply and saturate the water with ions, the role of groundwater flows and small drainages in altering water composition is also discussed Pietzsch et al., 2018 . FA1 deposition is controlled by two types of cyclicity, with i lowfrequency cycles superimposing ii high-frequency cycles. Low- frequency cycles are likely autogenic and correspond to the overall coarsening-upward trend in the facies association 2, varying from a lowermost interval dominated by shrubstones to an uppermost interval dominated by rudstones. This trend likely correspond to the lateral shift of the input source of the hyperconcentrated flows. Three types of highfrequency cycles are depicted. The first correspond to thinning-upward cycles related to hyper-concentrated flows, frequently observed in the Rfp facies overlain by Gm, due to the gradual deceleration and loss of Fig. 7. Photographs of core samples illustrating sedimentary facies Gl, Gp, and Rm associated with FA2 orange band . A and A showcase laminated grainstone characterized by wedge-shaped sets displaying low-angle and planar parallel laminae. B and C depict structureless pebble grainstone, featuring interspersed rounded carbonates and silicified pebbles ranging from approximately 40 to 70 mm in diameter. D and E exhibit structureless massive rudstone with angular to subrounded clasts, displaying low sphericity and resembling irregular to flat tabular pebbles and cobbles. 11 R.S.P. de Medeiros et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 161 2024 106700 energy of this flow Fig. 3 part 2 . The second cyclicity type is identified by reworking cycles, with SH facies erosively overlapped by Gm, due to the action of fair-weather wave base and periodic rainfall that favor the transport and dispersion of the most distal facies of the HCF, reworking the top of the facies in situ Fig. 3 part 1, and 6 . The third cycle type is observed from the growth of shrub morphology towards the top of the SH facies. The three types of cycles likely result from high-frequency climate oscillations which regulate the depositional processes by con trolling i episodes of high precipitation and overland flow initiation cycle type 1 , ii oscillations of wave base cycle type 2 , and iii Fig. 8. Photomicrographs illustrating the microfacies described in FA2. A Spherulites 0.2 1.3 mm displaying spherical, polygonal, and coalesced morphologies with varying degrees of alteration e.g., Gl Crossed Polarized Light Image XPL . B Coalesced and fused forms of spherulites exhibiting reduced alteration compared to other morphologies e.g., Gl XPL . C Angular-shaped coarse ooid with deformed features, such as broken edges e.g., Gl Plain Polarized Light Image PPL . D Intraclastic grainstone composed of carbonate intraclasts with subordinate spherulites, ooids, and dolomite cement e.g., Gp PPL . E Spherulitic grainstone composed of spherulites, with a minor occurrence of carbonate intraclasts and altered shrub fragments e.g., Gp XPL . e.g., Gp XPL . F Ooids with spherulite cores and their cortex displaying concentric smooth laminae, also occurring with altered shrub fragments e.g., Gp XPL . G Intraclastic rudstone microfacies composed of clasts of shrubs, carbonates, and composite spherulites e.g., Rm XPL . H Spherulitic rudstone microfacies composed of larger and angular clasts interspersed between spherical and composite spherulites e.g., Rm XPL . I Well-preserved fan-shaped shrub fragments with cement e.g., Rm PPL . J Intraclastic rudstone with sparry dolomite cementation e.g., Rm PPL . K Intraclast rudstone with a fringe of silica cement grading to sitaxial e.g., Rm facies XPL . L Rudstone microfacies displaying interparticle, intraparticle, and intercrystalline pores e.g., Rm facies XPL . 12 R.S.P. de Medeiros et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 161 2024 106700 variations in lacustrine water alkalinity cycle type 3 . boundary. Internally, the grainstone is structureless and marked by interspersed rounded pebbles ranging from c. 40 70 mm in diameter Fig. 7B and C . In thin section, the pebble grainstone is formed by the alternation between two microfacies i intraclastic- and ii spherulitic grain stones. The intraclastic grainstone is predominantly composed of car bonate intraclasts with subordinate amount of spherulites, ooids, and few occurrences of ostracodes they show moderate sorting, varying from 0.1 to 2.1 mm in diameter Fig. 8D . The spherulitic grainstone is predominantly composed of spherulites, with minor occurrence of car bonate intraclasts, ooids, and shrub fragments. The spherulites exhibit various morphologies, including spherical, elliptical, polygonal, which ultimately occur coalesced at places Fig. 8E . The ooids frequently show spherulite cores and their cortex display concentric smooth laminae, whilst the shrub fragments demonstrate some degree of alteration Fig. 8F . Overall, the spherulitic grainstone displays moderate sorting where allochems range from 0.2 to 1.7 mm in diameter. Finally, the facies is marked by hypidiotopic and idiotopic dolomite cementation. 4.1.2.2.1. Depositional process. The presence of rounded pebbles in grainstones is directly associated with the wave reworking of episodic hyperconcentrated flow, primarily influenced by fair-weather waves. Supporting evidence for wave reworking includes the occurrence of rounded grains and a substantial quantity of ooids. Chen et al. 2012 detailed subangular pebble-sized intraclasts in grainstones, resembling our facies, which were deposited in moderately agitated shallow-subtidal environments. The increased concentration of pebbles towards the top of the pebble grainstone facies indicates relatively higher-energy conditions cf. Hiroki and Terasaka, 2005 . Milroy and Wright 2000 proposed that the association of oolitic grainstones with gravel-conglomerate, akin to our massive rudstone facies at the top of the unit, suggests highly variable energy levels over relatively short distances. This variability implies a response to both storm waves and fair-weather processes on a gently inclined beachface. 4.1.2. Foreshore-shoreface transition deposits - FA2 The facies association 2 occurs at the uppermost part of the studied interval and constitute a c. 7 m thick coarsening-upward sequence that is formed, from the base to the top, by the following facies i laminated grainstone, ii pebble grainstone, and iii massive rudstone Fig. 7 . 4.1.2.1. Laminated grainstone Gl . The laminated grainstone facies occurs in c. 1 m thick beds from 0.9 to 1.2 m that show gradual transition with the facies association 1 at the base and are erosively overlaid by pebble grainstone facies at the top. The grainstone beds are organized into c. 30 50 mm thick wedge-shaped bedsets outlined by low-angle flat boundaries of opposing apparent dip directions Fig. 7A and A . Internally, the wedge-shaped sets display low-angle planar parallel laminae that lye conformably to the set base and show erosive contact with the top set boundary. The low-angle laminae are c. 2 5 mm thick and laterally continuous throughout the core Fig. 7A . Individual lamina further displays inverse grading, varying from medium-coarse sand at the base to coarse sand at the top. Moreover, the grainstone is predominantly composed of ooids and locally displays carbonate and silica clasts interspersed between laminae. In thin section, the laminated grainstone reveals three alternating microfacies i spherulitic-, ii oolitic-, and iii shrubby grainstone. The spherulites range from 0.2 to 1.3 mm in diameter and display varying degrees of alteration they exhibit spherical, fractured, elliptical, and polygonal morphologies, locally showing coalesced spherulites of different morphologies see Fig. 8A . The coalesced and fused forms of spherulites are more abundant towards the top of the profile and exhibit less alteration compared to other morphologies see Fig. 8B . The ooids range from 0.25 to 0.5 mm in diameter, showing distinct core compo sitions, primarily consisting of spherulites. Towards the upper part of the profile, the ooids become coarser and display compacted features such as deformed, angular shapes, and broken edges see Fig. 8C . Finally, the microfacies reveal predominance of hypidiotopic and idiotopic dolomite cementation and further display fragments of bioclasts, ostracods, pel lets, sulfides, and phosphates as accessory elements. 4.1.2.1.1. Depositional process. The laminated grainstone facies provides compelling evidence of swash-backwash effects in beach areas. A prominent feature of this facies is the presence of wedge-shaped sets, indicative of bidirectional flows. These sets, characterized by parallel laminae formed during the lake-shoreline elevation, demonstrate the planar display of the depositional environment. Notably, the tops of these laminations show truncation by low-angle laminations formed by current crescents on beach faces, influenced by backwash flow Bhat tacharya, 1993 . Laminations resulting from swash-backwash processes exhibit inverse grading, attributed to high-concentration flows where frequent grain collisions occur Asbury and Sallinger, 1981 . During the initial stages of upwash, the breaking of waves on the foreshore induces large-scale turbulence, leading to a substantial amount of suspended sediment. This sediment is then added to the bedload in the final stages of upwash. Subsequently, the upwash behaves similarly to backwash, transporting sediment primarily in a highly concentrated bedload and commonly resulting in inverse grading Clif ton, 1969 . The presence of low-angle laminations, associated with well-sorted and well-rounded reworked grains, is a characteristic feature of wavedominated sandy beach environments Clifton, 2003, 2006 . Addition ally, the abundance of reworked ooids in this facies, often exhibiting tangential fabrics, is more likely to be preserved during grain-to-grain collisions under turbulent conditions Tucker and Wright, 1990 . 4.1.2.3. Massive rudstone Rm . The massive rudstone constitute c. 1 m thick beds ranging from 0.4 to 1.3 m that erosively overly the lami nated grainstone and occur vertically stacked along a c. 2 m thick in terval. The rudstone facies demonstrated structureless character and is formed by c. 70 150 mm clasts with angular to subrounded angularity and low sphericity resembling irregular to flat tabular pebbles and cobbles Fig. 7E . The clasts are oligomictic, displaying mostly silicified carbonates with subordinate presence of non-silicified carbonates. Locally, the massive rudstone facies shows c. 3 5 mm thick silica-rich layers Fig. 7E . In thin section, the rudstone facies is formed by the alternation be tween intraclastic and spherulitic rudstone microfacies. Both microfa cies show varying proportions of intraclasts, spherulites, shrub fragments, and sulfides they are commonly characterized by low sorting and tightly packed grains see Fig. 8G . The intraclastic rudstone microfacies shows mostly dolomitized or silicified clasts with angular to sub-angular roundness. Internally, the intraclasts exhibit laminated textures, where laminae range from 0.25 to 7 mm in thickness. Addi tionally, mudstone intraclasts range from c. 0.4 2 mm in dimension and resemble elongated clasts that are locally marked by deformed edges and replacive microcrystalline dolomite. In contrast, the spherulitic rudstone microfacies is formed by larger 2 mm in dimension and angular clasts that occur interspersed between spherical and coalesced spherulites see Fig. 8H . Moreover, well-preserved fan-shaped shrub fragments are observed displaying some degree of alteration Fig. 8I . Overall, the rudstone microfacies are marked by microcrystalline hypi diotopic dolomite and sparry dolomite cementation Fig. 8J . Also, silica fringe covers the intraclasts, and microcrystalline silica is further depicted as porosity infills and carbonate intraclast replacement Fig. 8K . Finally, the rudstone microfacies displays interparticle, intraparticle, intercrystalline, and vug pores and present the highest 4.1.2.2. Pebble grainstone Gp . The pebble grainstone facies occurs in c. 2 m thick beds enclosed by the laminated grainstone facies, displaying erosive lower boundary and gradual transition towards the top 13 R.S.P. de Medeiros et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 161 2024 106700 shrubstones, 3 rudstones-grainstones, 4 grainstones-packstones, 5 mudstones, 6 mixed reworked carbonates and volcanic sediments, and 7 highly diagenetic altered carbonates. Facies 1 5 were observed in the cored interval, and their detailed petrology and petrography were reported earlier. Facies 6 and 7, on the other hand, were identified exclusively in the image logs. This study revealed that reworked carbonate deposits constitute a significant portion of the BVF approximately 63 of its thickness , with grainstones-packstones accounting for 36 and rudstones-grainstones facies for 17 . Volcanic-related sediments make up approximately 10 of the BVF. The image log displays reworked facies with low amplitude values, rough texture, and a mottled appearance. The mottled texture is characterized by high amplitude bright spots that vary in ge ometry, size, and abundance zoomed images in the 2nd to 4th panels Fig. 9 . The reworked carbonates exhibit a wide range of grain sizes, including particles up to pebble size. The grains primarily consist of intraclasts derived from various BVF facies, including fragments of shrubs, spherulites, mudstones, and silicified particles. Vertical distri bution analysis of the facies in the SB-E1 well shows that grainstones and rudstones dominate in the uppermost 100 m, corresponding to the Upper BVF, while coarse volcanic-related sediments such, as volcanic grainstones and rudstones, are more prevalent in the Lower BVF. The volcanic grainstones-rudstones are enriched with altered lithic frag ments, primarily of basaltic composition zoomed image in the 4th panel Fig. 9 . Bedding orientations derived from the interpretation of bedding planes in the image log 3rd column Fig. 9 indicate a main dip direction towards the southeast mean azimuth 110 . Analyzing the dip di rections within different intervals of the BVF, minor variations are observed, with the general trend shifting from southeast to east in the lowermost 50 m of the formation. The bedding dip angle gradually in creases from 6.31 in the uppermost part of the formation to 24.53 in the basal portion. porosity among the studied microfacies Fig. 8L . 4.1.2.3.1. Depositional process. The massive rudstone, as well as the Rfp facies, is deposited within a hyper-concentrated flow HCF context similar to that elucidated by Zavala 2020 . These facies showcase notable amounts of coarse particles and matrix, featuring tabular clasts. Turbulence within the HCF promotes the separation of clasts by density, resulting in a normal grading arrangement where the heaviest and densest particles are deposited first, a phenomenon well-documented by Mulder and Alexander 2001 . The lack of sedimentary structures associated with this facies is primarily ascribed to the swift deposition in high-density flows as expounded by Nemec and Steel 1984 . The significant quantity of eroded in situ facies, giving rise to frag ments of shrubs and spherulites, alongside associated cobble clasts, emerges from the reworking influence of fair-weather waves cf. Hiroki and Terasaka, 2005 . Despite the presence of flat pebbles in this facies, they manifest in smaller proportions and exhibit a more disordered arrangement. The reworking action induced by waves contributes to clast fragmentation and rounding, thereby shaping the distinct charac teristics observed cf. Hiroki and Terasaka, 2005 . Interpretation This study interprets the observed facies as indicative of a transi tional zone between the foreshore and shoreface, considering the extent of grain rounding and sedimentary structures that align with marginal settings influenced by wave action. In the context of a shallow lake, we adapted the traditional classification of external shelf environments i. e., foreshore and shoreface to accommodate the morphodynamic var iations identified in the facies description. The presence of oolitic grainstone facies, characterized by wellsorted and well-rounded grains, and lamination ranging from parallel to low-angle, offers crucial evidence for interpreting a foreshore envi ronment under upper flow regime. This suggests upper plane bed deposition on a beach face Elliott, 1986 Masuda and Yokokawa, 1988 Hiroki and Terasaka, 2005 . The intercalation of Gp and Gl facies in dicates sporadic increases in swash energy within the foreshore to shoreface. The hyper-concentrated flow HCF deposited in the surf zone of the upper shoreface, facilitating the rounding of pebbles due to the continuous action of fair-weather waves. The erosive surfaces observed at the base of the Gp facies represent the retreat of foreshore facies due to shoreline advancement cf. Hamon-Kerivel et al., 2020 . The Gp and Rm facies suggest a transition zone between the upper and lower shoreface, characterized by decreased energy conditions. This transition occurs as the surf zone with high activity shifts to a deeper zone dominated by wave shoaling Aagaard, 2014 . The Rm facies originates from the deposition of HCF in the lower shoreface and ex hibits reworking to a lesser extent by fair-weather or storm waves compared to the upper shoreface zone. 4.2.2. Seismic interpretation The analysis of reflector geometries and seismic facies distributions provides valuable insights into the stratigraphic evolution of the Barra Velha Formation BVF in the vicinity of well SB-E1. The transition between the Itapema Formation ITPF and BVF is marked by the PAU Fig. 10, blue line , which is a positive reflector exhibiting high ampli tude and characterized by erosional truncations. The transition between the BVE-200 and BVE-100 intervals is identified by a negative reflector with high amplitude, commonly observed throughout the study area Fig. 10, black line . In general, the ITPF reflectors demonstrate onlap onto the basement and exhibit a greater dip angle compared to the BVF. They display an average dip angle of 15 in the southeast direction, ranging from irregular to sheet-like shapes with low amplitude RGP4 Fig. 10B . On the other hand, the BVF reflectors onlap the basement RGP1 and gradually change their dip angle towards the basin southeast , with an average dip angle of 6 in the BVE-200 interval and 3 in the BVE-100 interval Fig. 10B . These results are consistent with the dip measure ments obtained from the interpretation of bedding planes in the bore hole image log Fig. 9 . Towards the bottom of the BVF, the reflectors exhibit a low ampli tude, varying from irregular to sheet-like shapes oriented towards the top Fig. 10B RGP3 . However, the reflectors in the upper part of the BVF display a high amplitude and a mounded shape, characterized by a bidirectional high-amplitude reflector Fig. 10B and C RGP2 . 4.2. Borehole image and seismic interpretation In addition to describing the core samples, the borehole image log BHI data Fig. 9 of well SB-E1 was integrated with seismic in terpretations to enhance our understanding of the stratigraphic evolu tion of the BVF. In this study, the BVF is divided into two major stratigraphic zones the lower interval known as BVE-200, and the upper interval, known as BVE-100 Minzoni et al., 2020 Rebelo et al., 2022 . The base of the BVE-200 is defined by the Pre-Alagoas Unconformity PAU , while the top of the BVE-100 is marked by the presence of evaporites from the Ariri Formation. It should be noted that the BVE-300 interval was not identified at the location of this well. 4.2.1. BHI interpretation The acoustic image log interpretation provided insights into the facies composition of non-cored intervals, covering approximately 285 m of the BVF Fig. 9 . Following a similar approach as previous studies Muniz and Bosence, 2015 Gomes et al., 2020 Basso et al., 2022 , a total of seven facies were identified 1 spherulitestones, 2 5. Discussion stratigraphic evolution of BVF Through analyses and interpretations at different scales, it was possible to describe the facies associations and correlate them with the stratigraphic evolution of BVF deposits in the study area. Although the 14 R.S.P. de Medeiros et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 161 2024 106700 Fig. 9. Well log interpretation of well SB-E1 focused on acoustic image log data. The second column displays image log facies interpretation, the third column shows bedding plane stereonet plots, and the fourth column shows the image log in 1 200 scale. At the right side of the figure, 1.5 m long intervals of image log 1 10 scale represent some of the main image log facies, with sidewall core thin section images. 15 R.S.P. de Medeiros et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 161 2024 106700 Fig. 10. Seismic-facies analysis of the studied area. A Location map with the indication of the crossline sections studied. B Crosslines A, B, C, and D to identify reflector geometry and stratigraphic surfaces. C The consistent identification of Retrogradational Pattern 2 RGP2 across diverse crosslines strongly suggests a transgressive phase. most detailed work focused on BVE-100 due to the availability of core sections, the same depositional relationship between reworked and in situ deposits was observed throughout the entire interval through the interpretation of image logs and side wall samples BVE-200 and BVE100 . In the BHI, the transition from ITPF to BVF is marked by the presence of the PAU and reworked sediments. The base of BVE-200 exhibits larger clast fragments and a higher concentration of volcanic grains compared to BVE-100 see Fig. 9 . Additionally, it displays a steeper dip angle of bedding planes. During the deposition of BVE-200, sediment supply exceeded the accommodation, resulting in the development of a pro gradational stacking pattern with a steeper dip angle, as exemplified by Catuneanu 2002 . These progradational patterns consist of large clasts, particularly volcaniclastic rocks, likely associated with the erosive ef fects of topographically higher regions see Fig. 10 . Barnett et al. 2021 associate these deposits as a product of gravity flows of fan deltas originating from nearby structural highs. The topographic highs, iden tified in Fig. 10B, experienced partial erosion of the Itapema and Cam boriu formations, possibly contributing to gravity flows and the formation of RGP3 see Figs. 3 and 4 . The BVE-100 was deposited during a more stable phase, character ized by frequent in-situ facies reworked by waves, smaller but abundant clasts, a significant presence of ooids, and wedge-shaped sets. The BVE100 records more coastal onlaps and shallower facies, as evidenced by the seismic reflectors RGP1 and RGP2, and by BHI facies and the backbarrier and fore-barrier facies associations see Fig. 11 . The presence of BVE-300 was not identified in the well or seismic images, likely due to erosion of its thin marginal sequences. To understand the evolution of seismic-stratigraphic events between ITPF and BVF, the terminations of seismic onlaps were applied to construct a lacustrine onlap curve, which reflects the migration of the lake margin e.g., Haq and Schutter, 2008 Fig. 12 . In the ITPF, the Fig. 11. 2D schematic models identify the relationship between depositional environments and their main sedimentary facies. 16 R.S.P. de Medeiros et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 161 2024 106700 Fig. 12. The evolutive geological model for BVE200 and BVE100. Seismic profile and onlap curve based on seismic interpretations of stratigraphic surfaces, reflecting the lake level variation. onlap curve indicates a more restricted lake with deposition occurring in a regressive phase of RGP4. The RGP4 indicates a progradational pattern, whose topset was eroded by the PAU. In the BVF, the onlap migration direction undergoes a drastic change, shifting landward and evidencing the expanding margins of the lake, as expected for a sag phase. While we demonstrate transgressive phases in the lake, studies, such as Pietzsch et al. 2018 , indicate that no marine contribution oc curs during BVF deposition. The seismic data displays a landward onlap migration pattern for the BVF Fig. 12 due to increased lake size. However, the occurrence of a shallowing-upward pattern is possible due to high carbonate production and accumulation during the sag phase of the basin, both through the chemical precipitation of carbonates in situ and the recurring inputs of transported clastic particles. Moreover, Pietzsch et al. 2018 interpret a shallow endorheic lake with a high evaporation rate based on 13C and 18O analyses, identifying 13 cycles of lake stage, with the last three cycles at the top of BVF exhibiting depleted 18O. This depletion possibly indicates an increase in freshwater or groundwater input into the system, promoting a rise in lake level in aligment with our onlap curve Fig. 12 . The BVE-100 involves the superimposition of coarse reworked facies from a foreshore-shoreface transition onto primarily in situ facies from the back-barrier deposits. This facies association overlap reflects the lateral migration of environments resulting from a retrogradational stacking pattern during transgressive phase in the depositional se quences, which is consistent with seismic interpretations and the onlap curve Figs. 11 and 12 . While we have identified the transgressive pattern of facies associations, the stratigraphic profiles exhibit a different facies stacking, with a coarsening upward trend, attributed to the predominance of rudstone facies at the top of the stratigraphic profiles. This coarsening upward stacking is a reflection of lowfrequency cycles that correspond to the lateral shift of the input source of hyperconcentrated flows Fig. 12 . Andrews et al. 2016 describe a similar example to what is discussed here, identifying a shallow lake with inter-bars, ponds, and ephemeral fluvial systems that exhibit a lateral shift of the input source, influencing the lacustrine shore zone architecture differently, and sporadically deposit and rework the top of the lacustrine facies, forming a coarsening-upward pattern. With regards to the BVE-100, the structures associated with RGP2 resemble a mound-like carbonate structure. The carbonate mound-like feature described in this study is a barrier built through low-frequency and high-frequency cycles, with lacustrine in situ facies affected by HCF and wave influence. Some cyclic patterns presented in this work, particularly the high-frequency reworking cycles, are partially discussed in Soares et al. 2023 . The seismic analysis reveals bidirectional dip angles within the RGP2 strata, which align with the positioning of carbonate mound-like struc tures on the reworked deposits of the BVE-200 Fig. 12 . However, it is important to note that the mound-like structures described in this study differ from modern carbonate mounds, such as those documented by Hebbeln and Samankassou 2015 . Nevertheless, similar features can be identified in this study, including the formation of belts or clusters of mounds, as observed in the seismic images depicted in Fig. 10. This cluster pattern is commonly observed in numerous Paleozoic examples worldwide, including regions in Morocco and Algeria Wendt et al., 2001 , Belgium Aretz and Chevaliers, 2007 , the UK Bridges and Chapman, 1988 , and New Mexico, USA Jeffery and Stanton, 1996 . 6. Hydrocarbon potential and exploration in reworked deposits The increasing demand for energy driven by industrial and social consumption has led to extensive exploration of conventional oil and gas reservoirs. Modern stratigraphic studies highlight the significant po tential for hydrocarbon exploration in deepwater environments, 17 R.S.P. de Medeiros et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 161 2024 106700 the sedimentary dynamics specific to the study area but also introduces novel insights into foreshore-shorefacies associations, the origin of reworked deposits, transgressive phases in lake evolution, and in terpretations of mound-like structures. These findings serve as a foun dational contribution to pre-salt studies, opening avenues for further research and comparative analysis in diverse geological settings. particularly emphasizing coarse clastic deposits formed by gravity flows Yuan et al., 2019 Yong et al., 2023 . In the Santos Basin, the oil system consists of source shales from the Pic arras and Itapema formations, and reservoir carbonates from the Barra Velha Formation. Anomalous re gions with higher production are often associated with wells containing a significant amount of reworked material de Freitas et al., 2022 . Apart from the sediment type, the geometry of these reworked bodies is directly linked to the development of primary porosity, pore connec tivity, and enhanced productivity. In this context, the well SB-E1 emerges as one of the top ten producers in the basin in recent years i. e., 2022 , averaging 23,000 barrels per month and reaching up to 35, 000 barrels per month during the peak exploration period ANP, 2023 . The upper part of well SB-E1 FA2 , as discussed in the sedimentary facies analysis, represents the most productive interval. Several signifi cant petrographic and stratigraphic characteristics can be identified to justify this high productivity. These include lower silicification compared to BVE-200 based on the image log facies Fig. 9 , a sub stantial amount of primary and secondary porosity with close pore connections, facies exhibiting a high degree of sorting, and minimal regional erosional features. Additional morpho-stratigraphic aspects that contribute to the high productivity of deposits in FA1 and FA2 include their good lateral continuity, strong vertical connectivity, high aspect ratio, and trapping of these layers by the thick overlying salt pack cf. Weimer et al., 2006 . The lateral continuity of the mounds can be observed in the seismic image Fig. 12 , exhibiting a lateral extension aligned with the NE-SW orientation of the geological high. CRediT authorship contribution statement Renato Sol Paiva de Medeiros Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing original draft, Writing review editing. Mateus Basso Formal analysis, Conceptualization, Supervision, Meth odology, Writing original draft. Guilherme F. Chinelatto Concep tualization, Investigation, Methodology, Supervision, Writing review editing. Marcus Vini cius Theodoro Soares Investigation, Method ology, Validation, Writing review editing. Gabriela F. Matheus Formal analysis, Investigation. Juan Francisco Villacreses Morales Formal analysis, Investigation, Software, Validation, Writing original draft. Luiza de Carvalho Mendes Investigation, Software. Alexandre Campane Vidal Funding acquisition, Project administration, Supervi sion, Visualization. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare the following financial interests personal re lationships which may be considered as potential competing interests Renato Sol Paiva de Medeiros reports financial support was provided by Equinor ASA. Renato Medeiros reports a relationship with Equinor ASA that includes funding grants. If there are other authors, they declare that they have no known competing financial interests or per sonal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work re ported in this paper. 7. Conclusion In summary, this sedimentary study provides a comprehensive analysis of the depositional patterns and facies associations within the BVF deposits in the study area. Through detailed examinations at various scales, particularly focusing on BVE-100 and extending insights through BVE-200, the research has uncovered significant insights into the stratigraphic evolution of the basin. A notable achievement of this work is the identification and description of foreshore-shorefacies as sociations, marking the first instance of such characterization in this context. The recognition of these associations in the BVE-100, with their unique features such as frequent in situ facies reworking by waves, and swash-backwash activites in beach zone, enriches our comprehension of nearshore environments during specific depositional phases. The origin of reworked deposits in the BVE-200 and the BVE-100 is a focal point in our findings. The larger clast fragments and heightened concentration of volcanic grains in the BVE-200 suggest a prograda tional stacking pattern resulting from sediment supply surpassing ac commodation. The erosive effects of topographically higher regions, likely associated with gravity flows, contribute to the formation of these reworked deposits. On the other hand, the BVE-100, deposited during a more stable phase, presents a distinctive combination of foreshoreshorefacies and in-situ facies from back-barrier deposits, shedding light on lateral environmental shift during transgressive phase. The study provides comprehensive insights into the transgressive phases in the BVF. The construction of a lacustrine onlap curve, coupled with seismic data, demonstrates a marked shift in onlap migration di rection from a more restricted lake phase in the ITPF to an expanding phase during the sag phase of the BVF. A cruacial aspect of our study centers on the interpretation of moundlike structures, particularly those linked to RGP2 in the BVE-100. Drawing upon abiotic mound models, we propose an interpretation shaped by both low-frequency and high-frequency cycles. These struc tures exhibit a barrier-like nature influenced by lacustrine in situ facies affected by HCF and wave activity. Although our findings diverge from the characteristics of modern carbonate mounds, our study identifies shared features, such as the formation of belts or clusters of mounds, aligning with examples observed globally. In conclusion, this research not only deepens our understanding of Data availability The authors do not have permission to share data. Acknowledgments We gratefully acknowledge the generous support provided by EPIC Energy Production Innovation Center, hosted by the University of Campinas UNICAMP and sponsored by FAPESP Sa o Paulo Research Foundation Grant No. 2017 15736-3 . We would also like to express our appreciation to Equinor Brazil for their support and funding, as well as to ANP Brazil s National Oil, Natural Gas and Biofuels Agency for their assistance through the R D levy regulation. Special thanks are extended to the Center for Petroleum Studies CEPETRO and School of Mechanical Engineering FEM for their contributions. Additionally, we acknowledge Interactive Petrophysics IP software and Schlumberger Information Solutions for providing academic licenses of the Petrel software, which greatly facilitated our research endeavors. References Aagaard, T., 2014. Sediment supply to beaches cross-shore sand transport on the lower shoreface. J. Geophys. Res. Earth Surf. 119, 913 926. Alvarenga, R.S., Iacopini, D., Kuchle, J., Scherer, C.M.S., Goldberg, K., 2016. Seismic characteristics and distribution of hydrothermal vent complexes in the Cretaceous offshore rift section of the Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 74, 12 25. ANP, 2023. Painel dina mico Produc a o de petro leo e ga s natural. Avaliable in app. powerbi.com view r eyJrIjoiNzVmNzI1MzQtNTY1NC00ZGVhLTk5N2ItNzBkMD NhY2IxZTIxIiwidCI6IjQ0OTlmNGZmLTI0YTYtNGI0Mi1iN2VmLT EyNGFmY2FkYzkxMyJ9 . Andrews, S.D., Moreau, J., Archer, S., 2016. Devonian lacustrine shore zone architecture giving perspective to cliff exposures with ground penetrating radar. Sedimentology 63 7 , 2087 2105. 18 R.S.P. de Medeiros et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 161 2024 106700 Aretz, M., Chevaliers, E., 2007. After the collapse of stromatoporid-coral reefs the Famennian and Dinantian reefs of Belgium much more than Waulsortian mounds. Geological Society, London, Special Publications 275 1 , 163 188. Asbury, h, Sallinger jr., 1981. Swash mark and grain flow. J. Sediment. Petrol. 51 1 , 261 264. Aslanian, D., Moulin, M., Olivet, J.-L., Unternehr, P., Matias, L., Bache, F., Rabineau, M., Nouze , H., Klingelhoefer, F., Contrucci, I., Labails, C., 2009. Brazilian and African passive margins of the central segment of the south Atlantic ocean kinematic constraints. Tectonophysics 468, 98 112. Barnett, A.J., Obermaier, M., Amthor, J., Juk, K., Camara, R., Sharafodin, M., Bolton, M., 2018. Origin and significance of thick carbonate grainstone packages in non-marine successions a case study from the Barra Velha Formation. In Santos Basin. Abstract Adapted from Poster Presentation Given at 2018 AAPG Annual Convention Exhibition. Salt Lake City, Utah. Barnett, A.J., Fu, L., Rapasi, T., Scotellaro, C., Guha, J., Cabolova, A., Domingues, A.L., 2021. Seismic characterization and origin of clinoforms in lacustrine depositional environments a case study from the Cretaceous of the South Atlantic. Geological Society, London, Special Publications 509 1 , 127 145. Basso, M., Souza, J.P.P., Hono rio, B.C.Z., Melani, L.H., Chinelatto, G.F., Belila, A.M.P., Vidal, A.C., 2022. Acoustic image log facies and well log petrophysical evaluation of the Barra Velha Formation carbonate reservoir from the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. Carbonates Evaporites 37 3 , 50. Bhattacharya, A., 1993. Backwash-and-swash-oriented current crescents indicators of beach slope, current direction and environment. Sediment. Geol. 84 1 4 , 139 148. Bridges, P.H., Chapman, A.J., 1988. The anatomy of a deep water mud-mound complex to the southwest of the Dinantian platform in Derbyshire, UK. Sedimentology 35 1 , 139 162. Carlotto, M.A., Baptista da Silva, R.C., Yamato, A.A., Trindade, W.L., Pinheiro Moreira, J. L., Rosa Fernandes, R.A., Soares Ribeiro, O.J., Peres Gouveia JR., W., Carminati, J.P., Qicai, D., Junfeng, Z., Da Silva-Telles JR., A.C., 2017. Libra a newborn giant in the Brazilian presalt province. In Merrill, R.K., Sternbach, C.A. Eds. , Giant Fields of the Decade 2000 2010, vol. 113. AAPG Memoir, pp. 165 176. Carvalho, A.M.A., Hamon, Y., De Souza Jr., O.G., Carramal, N.G., Collard, N., 2022. Facies and diagenesis distribution in an Aptian pre-salt carbonate reservoir of the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil a comprehensive quantitative approach. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 141, 105708. Catuneanu, O., 2002. Sequence stratigraphy of clastic systems concepts, merits, and pitfalls. J. Afr. Earth Sci. 35 1 , 1 43. Ceraldi, T.S., Green, D., 2016. Evolution of the South Atlantic lacustrine deposits in response to Early Cretaceous rifting, subsidence and lake hydrology. In Ceraldi, T.S., Hodgkinson, R.A., Backe, G. Eds. , Petroleum Geoscience of the West Africa Margin, vol. 438. Geological Society, London, p. 77. Chafetz, H.S., Guidry, S.A., 1999. Bacterial shrubs, crystal shrubs, and ray-crystal shrubs bacterial vs. abiotic precipitation. Sediment. Geol. 126, 57 74. Chafetz, Henry, Barth, Jennifer, Cook, Megan, Guo, Xuan, Zhou, Jie, 2017. Origins of carbonate spherulites implications for Brazilian aptian pre-salt reservoir. Sedimentary Geology, S0037073817303007. Chen, J., Chough, S.K., Lee, J.-H., Han, Z., 2012. Sequence-stratigraphic comparison of the upper Cambrian Series 3 to Furongian succession between the Shandong region, China and the Taebaek area, Korea high variability of bounding surfaces in an epeiric platform. Geosci. J. 16 4 , 357 379. https doi.org 10.1007 s12303-0120040-5. Chinelatto, G.F., Belila, A.M.P., Basso, M., Souza, J.P.P., Vidal, A.C., 2020. A taphofacies interpretation of shell concentrations and their relationship with petrophysics a case study of Barremian-Aptian coquinas in the Itapema Formation, Santos Basin-Brazil. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 116, 104317. Claes, H., Erthal, M.M., Soete, J., O zkul, M., Swennen, R., 2017. Shrub and pore type classification petrography of travertine shrubs from the Ball k-Belevi area Denizli, SW Turkey . Quat. Int. 437, 147 163. Clifton, H.E., 1969. Beach lamination nature and origin. Mar. Geol. 7, 553 559. Clifton, H.E., 2003. Coastal sedimentary facies. In Middleton, G.V. Ed. , Encyclopedia of Sediments and Sedimentary Rocks. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, pp. 149 157. Clifton, H.E., 2006. A re-examination of facies models for clastic shorelines. In Walker, R.G., Posamentier, H. Eds. , Facies Models Revisited. Special Publication 84, Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists, Tulsa, OK, 293 33. de Freitas, V.A., dos Santos Vital, J.C., Rodrigues, B.R., Rodrigues, R., 2022. Source rock potential, main depocenters, and CO2 occurrence in the pre-salt section of Santos Basin, southeast Brazil. J. S. Am. Earth Sci. 115, 103760. Dickson, J.A.D., 1966. Carbonate identification and genesis as revealed by staining. J. Sediment. Res. 36 2 , 491 505. Elliott, T., 1986. Siliciclastic shorelines. In Read, H.G. Ed. , Sedimentary Environments and Facies, second ed., 1 ing . Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford, pp. 155 188. Erthal, M.M., Capezzuoli, E., Mancini, A., Claes, H., Soete, J., Swennen, R., 2017. Shrub morpho-types as indicator for the water fow energy tivoli travertine case Central Italy . Sediment. Geol. 347, 79 99. Farias, F., Szatmari, P., Bahniuk, A., Franca, A.B., 2019. Evaporitic carbonates in the presalt of Santos Basin Genesis and tectonic implications. Mar. Pet. Geol. 105, 251 272. Gomes, J.P., Bunevich, R.B., Tedeschi, L.R., Tucker, M.E., Whitaker, F.F., 2020. Facies classification and patterns of lacustrine carbonate deposition of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazilian pre-salt. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 113, 104176. Haq, B.U., Schutter, S.R., 2008. A chronology of Paleozoic sea-level changes. Science 322 5898 , 64 68. Hamon-Kerivel, K., Cooper, A., Jackson, D., Sedrati, M., Pintado, E.G., 2020. Shoreface mesoscale morphodynamics a review. Earth Sci. Rev., 103330 Hebbeln, D., Samankassou, E., 2015. Where did ancient carbonate mounds grow in bathyal depths or in shallow shelf waters Earth Sci. Rev. 145, 56 65. Hiroki, Y., Terasaka, T., 2005. Wavy lamination in a mixed sand and gravel foreshore facies of the Pleistocene Hosoya Sandstone, Aichi, central Japan. Sedimentology 52 1 , 65 75. Jeffery, D.L., Stanton, Jr R.J., 1996. Biotic Gradients on a Homoclinal Ramp the Alamogordo Member of the Lake Valley Formation, Lower Mississippian, vol. 107. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, New Mexico, USA, pp. 111 126, 1. Karner, G.D., Gamboa, L.A.P., 2007. Timing and origin of the South Atlantic pre-salt sag basins and their capping evaporites, 285 1 , 15 35. Krainer, K., Spo tl, C., 1998. Abiogenic silica layers within a fluvio-lacustrine succession, Bolzano Volcanic Complex, northern Italy a Permian analogue for Magadi-type cherts Sedimentology 45 3 , 489 505. Lai, J., Wang, G., Wang, S., Cao, J., Li, M., Pang, X., Han, C., Fan, X., Yan, L., He, Z., Qin, Z., 2018. A review on the applications of image logs in structural analysis and sedimentary characterization. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 95, 139 166. Lokier, S.W., Al Junaibi, M., 2016. The petrographic description of carbonate facies are we all speaking the same language Sedimentology 63 7 , 1843 1885. Mann, J., Rigg, J.W.D., 2012. New geological insights into the Santos Basin. GeoExpro 9 1 , 36 40. Masuda, F., Yokokawa, M., 1988. What can be read in ancient beach deposits Monthly J. Chikyu 10, 523 530. McGlue, M.M., Soreghan, M.J., Michel, E., Todd, J.A., Cohen, A.S., Mischler, J., et al., 2010. Environmental controls on shell-rich facies in tropical lacustrine rifts a view from Lake Tanganyika s littoral. Palaios 25 7 , 426 438. Milroy, P.G., Wright, V.P., 2000. A highstand oolitic sequence and associated facies from a Late Triassic lake basin, south-west England. Sedimentology 47 1 , 187 209. Minzoni, M., Cantelli, A., Thornton, J., Wignall, B., 2020. Seismic-Scale Geometries and Sequence-Stratigraphic Architecture of Early Cretaceous Syn-Post Rift Carbonate Systems, Pre-salt Section, Brazil. Geological Society. Special Publications, London. Moulin, M., Aslanian, D., P, 2010. A new starting point for the south and equatorial Atlantic ocean. Earth Sci. Rev. 97 Issues1 4 , 59 95. Moreira, J.L.P., Madeira, C.V.M., Gil, J.A., Machado, M.A.P., 2007. Bacia de Santos. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras Rio de Janeiro 15 2 , 531 549. Muniz, M.C., Bosence, D.W.J., 2015. Pre-salt microbialites from the Campos Basin offshore Brazil image log facies, facies model and cyclicity in lacustrine carbonates. Geological Society, London, Special Publications 418 1 , 221 242. Nemec, W., Steel, R.J., 1984. Alluvial and Coastal Conglomerates Their Significant Features and Some Comments on Gravelly Mass-Flow Deposits, pp. 1 31. Nutz, A., Schuster, M., Ghienne, J.F., Roquin, C., Bouchette, F., 2018. Wind-driven waterbodies a new category of lake within an alternative sedimentologically-based lake classification. J. Paleolimnol. 59, 189 199. Oliveira, L.C., Rancan, C.C., Sartorato, A.C.L., Farias, F.A., Pereira, E., 2021. Drowning unconformities on presalt carbonate platforms examples from the Itapema Formation lower cretaceous , Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 577, 110570. Platt, N.H., Wright, V.P., 1991. Lacustrine carbonates facies models, facies distributions and hydrocarbon aspects. Lacustrine facies analysis 57 74. Pentecost, A., 2005. Travertine. Springer, New York. Pietzsch, R., Oliveira, D.M., Tedeschi, L.R., Queiroz Neto, J.V., Figueiredo, M.F., Vazquez, J.C., Souza, R.S., 2018. Palaeohydrology of the Lower Cretaceous pre-salt lacustrine system, from rift to post-rift phase, Santos Basin, Brazil. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 507, 60 80. Rebelo, T.B., Batezelli, A., Mattos, N.H.S., Leite, E.P., 2022. Flow units in complex carbonate reservoirs a study case of the Brazilian pre-salt. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 140, 105639. Reston, T.J., 2010. The opening of the central segment of the South Atlantic symmetry and the extension discrepancy. Petrol. Geosci. 16 3 , 199 206. Saller, A., Rushton, S., Buambua, L., Inman, K., Mcneil, R., Dickson, J.A.D., 2016. Pre-salt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola. AAPG Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull. 100, 1135 1164. Soares, M.V.T., da Silva Bomfim, L., Vidal, A.C., Avansi, M.C.K., Cunha, O.R., Garci a, R. G.V., de Paiva Medeiros, R.S., 2023. Pre-salt carbonate cyclicity and depositional environment NMR petrophysics and Markov cyclicity of lacustrine acoustic facies Santos Basin, Brazil . Mar. Petrol. Geol. 157, 106494. Souza, R.S., Arienti, L.M., Viana, S.M., Falcao, L.C., Cuglieri, M.A., Silva, R.P., Leite, C.O., Oliveira, V.C., Oliveira, D.M., Anjos, C., Amora, R., Carmo, I.D., Coelho, C.E., 2018. Petrology of the hydrothermal and evaporitic continental Cretaceous Aptian presalt carbonates and associated rocks, South Atlantic Santos basin, offshore Brazil. In AAPG ACE Annual Convention Exhibition. Salt Lake City, USA. Terra, G.J.S., Spadini, A.R., Franc a, A.B., Sombra, C.L., Zambonato, E.E., Juschaks, L.C. S., Arienti, L.M., Erthal, M.M., Blauth, M., Franco, M.P., Matsuda, N.S., Carramal da Silva, N.G., Moretti Junior, P.A., D Avila, R.S.F., Souza, R.S., Tonietto, S.N., Anjos, S. M.C., Campinho, V.S., Winter, W.R., 2010. Classifcac a o de rochas carbona ticas aplica vel a s bacias sedimentares brasileiras. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 18 1 , 9 29. Tucker, M.E., Wright, V.P., 1990. Carbonate Sedimentology. Blackwell Scientific, Best Textbook on Science of Carbonate Deposition and Cementation. Oxford, p. 482. Weimer, P., Slatt, R.M., Bouroullec, R., Fillon, R., Pettingill, H., Pranter, M., Tari, G., 2006. Introduction to the Petroleum Geology of Deepwater Setting. American Association of Petroleum Geologists. Wendt, J., Kaufmann, B., Belka, Z., 2001. An exhumed Palaeozoic underwater scenery the Visean mud mounds of the eastern Anti-Atlas Morocco . Sediment. Geol. 145 3 4 , 215 233. Winter, W.R., Jahnert, R.J., Franca, A.B., 2007. Bacia de Campos. Bol. Geocie ncias Petrobra s 15 2 , 511e529.Wright, V. P. Barnett, A. J. 2015. An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic early Cretaceous lacustrine 19 R.S.P. de Medeiros et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 161 2024 106700 carbonates. In Bosence, D.W.J., et al. Eds. , Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production, vol. 418. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 209 219. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2015. An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates. Geological Society, London, Special Publications 418 1 , 209 219. Wright, P., Tosca, N., 2016. A Geochemical Model for the Formation of the Pre-salt Reservoirs, Santos Basin, Brazil Implications for Understanding Reservoir Distribution. AAPG Search and Discovery, article, 51304. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2020. The textural evolution and ghost matrices of the Cretaceous Barra Velha Formation carbonates from the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. Facies 66 1 , 7. Yuan, J., Yu, G.D., Song, M.S., Zhong, J.H., Dong, D.T., Wang, W., Liu, Y.L., Ma, L.C., 2019. Depositional characteristics and reservoir potential of Paleogene sediment gravity flow deposits on a faulted slope of the Zhanhua Sag, Bohai Bay Basin, China. J. Asian Earth Sci. 177, 89 106. Yong, J., Zhang, T., Zhang, X., Zheng, M., Han, Y., Ji, D., Wang, T., 2023. Evolution of sediment gravity flows in response to early Carboniferous subduction and closure of the West Junggar Basin, China. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 150, 106123. Zavala, Carlos, 2020. Hyperpycnal over density flows and deposits. J. Palaeogeogr. 20

[END_OF_PAPER]

Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Marine and Petroleum Geology journal homepage www.elsevier.com locate marpetgeo Facies and diagenesis distribution in an Aptian pre-salt carbonate reservoir of the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil A comprehensive quantitative approach Ancilla Maria Almeida Carvalho a, b, , Youri Hamon b, Olinto Gomes De Souza Jr a, Nivea Goulart Carramal a, Nathalie Collard b a b PETROBRAS, Av. Henrique Valadares, 28 Centro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 20231-030, Brazil IFPEN, Direction Ge osciences, 1 et 4 Avenue de Bois-Pre au, 92852, Rueil-Malmaison, Cedex, France A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T Keywords Pre-salt Santos Basin Lacustrine carbonates Diagenesis Dolomitization Aptian carbonate rocks of Santos Basin in the Brazilian southeastern continental margin show a highly hetero geneous reservoir quality conditioned by many controlling factors. This study presents a quantitative approach based on an integrated petrographic, mineralogical, and geochemical dataset of the Barra Velha Formation BVF to understand the spatial and temporal distribution of depositional and diagenetic aspects and the parameters controlling the nature and distribution of the diagenetic phases in Santos Basin pre-salt carbonate reservoirs. In this formation 3 units can be differentiated. The facies with higher Mg-clay content predominate in lower structural positions and regions with low relative relief. Higher proportions of spherulites occur in the transi tional zones, and fascicular calcite occurs preferentially in the transitional and higher structural positions. Grainstones are observed in all depositional environments, but with variations in their composition intraclasts, siliciclastic volcanoclastic grain, and clay content . Stratigraphically, facies with higher Mg-clay content pre dominate in Units 3 base and 2 intermediate , whereas Unit 1 top is marked by a greater proportion of grainstones and fascicular calcite. In Unit 1, fascicular calcite crusts tend to expand from the structural high, toward lower areas. The distribution of the main diagenetic products and their association with different facies highlight the role of depositional setting and primary constituents on the diagenetic processes. The tectonic and climatic context of the BVF favored the preferential precipitation and accumulations of Mg-clays in lower structural portions of the basin. The preservation of Mg-clays is also strongly linked to the structural setting, with more intense diagenetic alterations in higher structural areas. Dolomite is a major diagenetic phase in the studied samples, followed by silica. These diagenetic phases are largely associated with Mg-clay alteration and pre dominate in Unit 1. Mg-clays dissolution, as well as major alteration of carbonate phases, are concentrated in higher structural positions. Given the higher occurrence of faults in these areas and the presence of saddle dolomite, barite, celestine, and fluorite, which are typical products of hydrothermal alteration, part of the dissolution processes may be related to hydrothermal alteration. The depositional and diagenetic aspects indicate a close connection between the hydrochemical evolution of the lake waters with the origin and diagenesis of these deposits. 1. Introduction occurrence of giant offshore reservoirs, this sedimentary formation has been recently widely studied, producing several conceptual models about its tectonic, stratigraphic, and sedimentological evolution Karner and Gamboa, 2007 Lentini et al., 2010 Chaboureau et al., 2012 Mer cedes-Marti n et al., 2019 Minzoni et al., 2021 . These deposits were firstly interpreted as formed in a marine setting Dias, 2005 Moreira et al., 2007 Gomes et al., 2009 , then in an alkaline lacustrine environment Wright, 2012, 2022 Muniz and Bosence, 2015 The Aptian Pre-salt carbonate section in the Brazilian Southeastern continental margin Carminatti et al., 2009 Carlotto et al., 2017 rep resents a very unusual sedimentary system in terms of composition and dimension, raising questions about the environmental conditions that drove the sedimentation and early diagenetic evolution of these deposits Terra et al., 2010 Wright, 2012 Herlinger et al., 2017 . Given the Corresponding author. PETROBRAS, Av. Henrique Valadares, 28 Centro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 20231-030, Brazil. E-mail address ancillacarvalho petrobras.com.br A.M. Almeida Carvalho . https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2022.105708 Received 1 February 2022 Received in revised form 19 April 2022 Accepted 21 April 2022 Available online 29 April 2022 0264-8172 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 Tosca and Wright, 2015, 2018 Wright and Barnett, 2015 Herlinger et al., 2017 Tedeschi, 2017 Pietzsch et al., 2018 Artaga o, 2018 Lima and De Ros, 2019 . Some of the first works analyzing the pre-salt de posits attributed their formation to microbial-influenced processes, referring to them as microbialites and stromatolites Dias, 2005 Moreira et al., 2007 Terra et al., 2010, Muniz and Bosence, 2015 Merce des-Marti n et al., 2016 , while others proposed an abiotic origin Wright and Barnett, 2015 Tosca and Wright, 2015 Herlinger et al., 2017 Farias et al., 2019 Lima and De Ros, 2019 Gomes et al., 2020 Wright, 2022 . These latter works reported the scarcity of macrostructures and microstructures characteristic of microbial carbonates, and the crystal line fabrics and isotopic composition indicative of an abiotic, chemo genic origin of the pre-salt deposits. Herlinger et al. 2017 interpreted these deposits as due to syngenetic precipitation controlled by changes of the lacustrine geochemistry, resulting essentially in encrustation and replacement of stevensite deposits. The existence of peculiar features and mineral phases in these de posits allows the interpretation of different precipitation conditions and makes it difficult to find an ideal analogue Mercedes-Marti n et al., 2017 Deschamps et al., 2020 Magalhaes et al., 2020 Wright, 2022 . Furthermore, the close connection between the syngenetic and eodia genetic processes highlights the importance of disentangling the diagenesis suffered by the pre-salt deposits Herlinger et al., 2017 Lima and De Ros, 2019 Sartorato et al., 2020 Wright and Barnett, 2020 . Several studies emphasized the role of early diagenesis on the evolution of the deposits, mainly related to the dissolution of Mg-clay substrates and its replacement by calcite spherulites, dolomite and silica Tosca and Wright, 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2020 Herlinger et al., 2017 Farias et al., 2019 Lima and De Ros, 2019 . In fact, the Aptian carbonate rocks of Campos and Santos Basins show that reservoir quality is strongly conditioned by the characteristics of the depositional envi ronment and the associated diagenetic alterations Rezende and Pope, 2015 Herlinger et al., 2017 . The impact of diagenesis on the evolution of porosity and permeability is, according to several authors, not restricted to early alteration processes clay replacement or dissolution, calcite cementation , but also to the circulation of hydrothermal fluids in some locations of the basin Vieira de Luca et al., 2017 Lima and De Ros, 2019 Lima et al., 2020, Sartorato et al., 2020 . Thus, the combination of these sedimentary and diagenetic processes leads to the formation of complex and heterogeneous reservoirs. Un derstanding the spatial distribution of the diagenetic products is essen tial to determine the factors controlling the reservoir properties and to be predictive Morad et al., 2012 Whitaker and Frazer, 2018 . Although previous studies have provided detailed petrographic analyses and paragenetic relationships of the primary and diagenetic constituents of the Barra Velha Formation BVF from the Santos Basin Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2020 Farias et al., 2019 Carramal et al., 2022 and the coeval Macabu Formation from the Campos Basin Herlinger et al., 2017 Lima and De Ros, 2019 , an integrated quantitative view of the spatial and temporal distribution of the syngenetic and diagenetic phases is lacking. The characterization and interpretation of these pro cesses and products are still a matter of debate, and the definition of their quantitative distribution will contribute to the understanding of the paleoenvironmental conditions that drove the formation and mod ifications of these sediments. Based on a huge database of petrographic descriptions, this study aims to present a comprehensive quantitative characterization of the main depositional and diagenetic features of the lacustrine carbonates of the Barra Velha Formation BVF from a key area of the outer high in the Santos Basin. It also seeks to present spatial and temporal distribution patterns of facies and diagenetic products at reservoir scale, based on petrography, mineralogical analyses and carbon and oxygen stable isotope data. Finally, it discusses the different processes syngenetic, eodiagenetic and late hydrothermal-related that control the reservoir heterogeneities of the South-Atlantic pre-salt succession. The results will contribute to a better understanding of the origin and evolution of these carbonate rocks and provide valuable constraints to reservoir characterization. 2. Geological setting 2.1. Geodynamics The Santos Basin, on the southeastern portion of the Brazilian con tinental margin, extends along the coast of Rio de Janeiro, Sa o Paulo, Parana e Santa Catarina states, between parallels 23 and 28 South, and covers a total area of approximately 350.000 km2 Fig. 1A and B . The basin is located between the Pelotas Basin to the south, bounded by the Florianopolis high, and Campos Basin to the north, bounded by the Cabo Frio high Moreira et al., 2007 . The Santos Basin was formed during Early Cretaceous by the breakup of the Gondwana Continent. The Mesozoic rifting started in the southern parts of the South American continent in the Late Jurassic, reaching the equatorial margin by Late Aptian Early Albian, culminating in the separation of South American and African Plates Rabinowitz and Lab recque, 1979 Conceic a o et al., 1988 Chang et al., 1992 Cainelli and Mohriak, 1999 Moulin et al., 2010 . The South Atlantic Ocean can be divided into four long segments, from North to South the Equatorial segment, the Central segment, the Austral Segment and the Falkland Segment. The beginning of the rupture, during the Jurassic, occurred in the southern portion of the Austral Segment Popoff, 1988 Torsvik et al., 2009 Moulin et al., 2010 . In the Equatorial segment, the movement of the continent to the north and northwest was impeded by the young oceanic lithosphere of the Central Atlantic Ocean, Gulf of Mexico, and proto-Caribbean Szat mari and Milani, 2016 . As a result, from about 145 to 113 Ma, the South Atlantic rift remained closed in the northwest, along the Equatorial margin, but widened wedge-like to the south, along the South America s eastern margin. As the rift widened, the basaltic volcanism along the Ponta Grossa and Namibia dike swarms created the proto-Walvis Ridge, which barred the access of ocean waters to the central South Atlantic rift from the South Szatmari and Milani, 2016 . Moulin et al. 2010 , reviewing the kinematics of the opening of the South Atlantic, proposed that from 132 to 130 Ma, the opening occurred between the Walvis Ridge and Pelotas Basin. After 130 Ma and until Aptian, the Santos block started to follow the general westward move ment of the southern part of South America, playing the role of a kine matic buffer between the movements that created the northern Aptian basins. Since the rift was also barred from the Central Atlantic Ocean in the northwest, where the Equatorial margin had not yet rifted, an endorheic lacustrine basin formed Szatmari and Milani, 2016 . Moreira et al. 2007 divided the tectono-stratigraphic evolution of Santos Basin into rift, post-rift and drift supersequences Fig. 2 . The basement of the Santos Basin is composed of Precambrian metamorphic rocks from the Mantiqueira Province, generated during the Neo proterozoic Brasiliano-Pan African Orogeny Almeida et al., 1981 Heilbron et al., 2004 . The rift phase spans from Hauterivian to Early Aptian time Pereira and Feijo , 1994 , comprising the rocks of the Camboriu , Pic arras and Itapema Formations Figs. 1D and 2 . This phase is characterized by the development of rotated tilted-blocks and half-graben basins filled with thick sedimentary successions Milani et al., 2007 Alves et al., 2017 . The Pic arras Formation, deposited above the basaltic rocks of the Camboriu Formation, comprises alluvial sediments in proximal areas and shales of talc-stevensitic composition in lacustrine distal areas. In contrast, the Itapema Formation is composed of bivalve bioclastic rud stones concentrated on structural high domains, and of lime mudstones and organic-matter rich shales in the distal parts of the basin Moreira et al., 2007 . From Barremian to Aptian, in the Central segment, the rift devel opment is characterized by lithospheric extension, with block tilting in the inner upper continental crust and formation of small grabens 2 A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 Fig. 1. A Location of the Santos Basin in the southeast region of the Brazilian continental margin. B Location of the study area in the middle of the outer high in the Santos Basin modified from Papaterra, 2010 and Ysaccis et al., 2019 . C Structural map of the top of the Barra Velha Formation base of the evaporitic section , showing the location of the wells colored dots in the study area. The colors refer to the four paleogeographic sectors distinguished in the study area blue wells located in the lower part of the depositional profile, green wells located in the transitional area, orange wells located in the western part of the structural high, and pink wells located in the southeastern flank of the high. The dashed line represents the approximate location of the interpreted seismic line D . D Interpreted seismic section of the study area, southward to transect B, oriented perpendicularly to the topographic high and showing the different tectono-stratigraphic formations of the Santos Basin modified from Artaga o, 2018 . For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. occupied by lakes Dias et al., 1988 Karner et al., 2003 Carminatti et al., 2008 . A regional unconformity, related to uplift and erosion of the rift section Winter et al., 2007 Moreira et al., 2007 , the so-called Pre-Alagoas Unconformity, marks the transition to the Aptian post-rift phase Fig. 2 . The latest phase is characterized in the Santos Basin by the sediments of Barra Velha Formation BVF , main topic of this article. A phase of thermal subsidence followed, marked by an extensive deposition of evaporites during the uppermost Aptian and lowermost Albian Muniz and Bosence, 2015 Gomes et al., 2020 . The first marine ingressions promoted the deposition of halite and anhydrite in both South America and West Africa margins Asmus and Ponte, 1973 Cai nelli and Mohriak, 1999 Mio, 2005 . With the progression of the South Atlantic opening, the evaporites were overlain by an Albian marine carbonate platform, corresponding with the passive margin phase of the basin Chang et al., 1992 Mio, 2005 . 2.2. Case study The study area is situated in the central portion of the Santos Basin, on the outer high, with the wells studied distributed over a 45 km 56 km rectangular area Fig. 1C . The base of the evaporitic section that overlies the BVF is marked by structural lows and highs with NE-SW direction, reflecting the paleotopography at the end of the BVF succes sion Fig. 1C . The study region is characterized by a tilted fault block delimitated by normal faults with SE dip while the northwestern flank presents a ramp morphology, with a low-angle slope, the SE region displays a steep faulted-flank Fig. 1D . The sediment thickness varies greatly towards the structural highs, where the basal part of the BVF can 3 A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 Fig. 2. Lower Cretaceous stratigraphic chart of the Santos Basin, Brazil modified from Moreira et al., 2007 . environments are unclear. The study area was thus divided into four sectors, allowing to delineate the distribution of sediments and diage netic phases. The so-called higher area is represented by two wells, northwest of the structural high W5 and W10 . Seven wells are located on the southeastern steep flank W11 W17 . Six wells W3, W4, W7, W8, W9, W18, and W21 are situated in the transitional area of the northwestern low-angle slope, whereas six other wells W1, W2, W6, W19, and W20 are located in the so-called lower area. The well data were also arranged in three transects named Transects A, B, and C , either along or perpendicular to the structural high Fig. 1C . The database consists of core and petrographic descriptions 1483 thin sections , bulk-sample C and O isotopic analyses, quantitative evaluation of minerals by scanning electron microscopy and energydispersive X-ray spectroscopy QEMSCAN and X-ray diffraction XRD analyses, performed at Petrobras Research Center CENPES in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The thin sections were prepared with blue epoxy resin impregnation and stained with alizarin red-S and potassium ferricyanide solution, to differentiate carbonate minerals Dickson, 1965 . Petrographic analyses were carried out with a Zeiss Imager A2 microscope, using both plane-polarized light PPL and crossed-polarized light XPL . A semi-quantitative visual estimation of primary and diagenetic constit uents, and pore types, has been done using the comparison chart of Terry and Chilingar 1955 . The petrographic analysis also focused on the description of texture, fabric and paragenetic relationships. The results were documented using the Petroledge knowledge-based system. A statistical analysis was performed to evaluate the distribution and relationship between depositional and diagenetic phases. Stable C- and O- isotope analyses of bulk rocks were performed on 503 samples, derived from core plugs and sidewall cores from 6 wells. For the analysis, a mass spectrometer Delta V Plus Advantage, coupled to a dispositive for extraction of CO2 Kiel IV. 1 was used. The 18O 16O and 13 12 C C ratios are expressed in the conventional notation, in parts per thousand , relative to Vienna Pee Dee Belemnite VPDB . Bulk-rock X-Ray Diffraction XRD analyses were obtained from 811 samples and clay fraction mineral composition analyses were performed for 503 samples. For the clay fraction analyses, the samples were frag mented using a Branson Cell Disruptor Mod 350 and separated by be absent Fig. 1D . The BVF is bounded at the top by the evaporites of the Ariri For mation and at its base by the Pre-Alagoas Unconformity. An internal unconformity called the Intra-Alagoas Unconformity separates the postrift phase into two stratigraphic units Fig. 2 . Previous stratigraphic and sedimentological studies Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al., 2017 Artaga o, 2018 Gomes et al., 2020 allow the division of the BVF into three stratigraphic units, informally named Unit 3 base to Unit 1 top . The Intra-Alagoas unconformity marks the top of Unit 3 Fig. 2 , whereas the stratigraphic surface that separates Units 2 and 1 is a major sequence boundary Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al., 2017 . The BVF was initially interpreted as deposited in a transitional environment, from continental to shallow marine settings Moreira et al., 2007 Gomes et al., 2009 . Later, several authors dismissed the marine origin favoring the deposition of the BVF in an alkaline lacus trine environment Wright, 2012 Tosca and Wright, 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2015 Szatmari and Milani, 2016 Tedeschi, 2017 Pietzsch et al., 2018 . Based on petrographic descriptions from several wells of Santos Basin, Wright and Barnett 2020 described the BVF as a highly heterogeneous combination of in-situ and re-worked grains, with min eralogies comprising calcite, dolomite, magnesian silicates stevensite and talc , and silica. According to these authors, the dominant primary calcite components are fascicular crusts and spherulites, with some rare microbialites in the formation s uppermost 20 30 m. The carbonate components associated with Mg-silicate phases and the paucity of fish remains suggest highly restricted environments where mineral precipi tation was dominantly controlled by the lacustrine water geochemistry Herlinger et al., 2017 Mercedes-Marti n et al., 2019 Wright and Bar nett, 2020 . 3. Material and methods This work is based on data from 21 wells located at different posi tions within the study area and distributed on and from either side of a topographic, structural high Fig. 1C . The use of proximal and distal terminology, to refer to positions relatively closer and away from the structural high seems inadequate as this terminology has a depositional significance, and criteria to confidently discriminate between both 4 A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 using the Rietveld method Young, 1993 with FullProf software Rodriguez-Carvajal and Roisnel, 1998 . Mineralogical maps of 92 samples from 5 wells were produced using the equipment QEMSCAN 650 FEI with two EDS Bruker coupled detectors. several centrifuge steps. The identification of the clay minerals was performed on the air-dried samples, solvated with ethylene glycol, and subsequently heated at 490 C. The XRD analyses were performed in a RIGAKU D MAX-2200 PC diffractometer. The identification of bulk mineralogy was determined using the Jade software MDI and the PDF2 mineral database ICDD . The quantitative analyses were performed Fig. 3. Photomicrographs highlighting main facies of the Barra Velha Formation A Fascicular calcite crusts crossed-polarized light XPL B Mg-clay matrix engulfed by shrubs yellow arrow . Note the shrubs partially dissolved red arrow plane-polarized light PPL C Mg-claystones with spherulites, showing coa lesced and recrystallized spherulites PPL D Mg-claystones with spherulites showing a displacement aspect of the Mg-clay red arrow XPL E Mg-claystone with very fine dolomite crystals green arrow and dolomite rhombs red arrows . Note the absence of spherulites in this sub-facies PPL F Laminites composed by microcrystalline calcite. Red arrows highlight dissolution seams PPL G Laminites with a crenulated morphology, composed by intercalations of very fine calcite crystals, dolomite, and organic matter. Red arrows highlight millimeter-scale silica nodules XPL H General aspects of organic matter remnants PPL I General aspects of breccia features in laminites. Red arrows highlight the intraclasts XPL J Intraclastic grainstone Type-A composed by fragments of fascicular calcite crusts and spherulites PPL K Type-B grainstone with volcanoclastic fragments red arrow PPL L Type-C grainstone packstone composed of carbonate and Mg-clay intraclasts red arrows , with a minor fraction of siliciclastic grains PPL . For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. 5 A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 4. Results whereas the re-worked facies present different proportions of shrubs and spherulites intraclasts, siliciclastic volcanoclastic grains, with variable clay content. Based on the relative contributions of each constituent, Gomes et al. 2020 proposed a consistent and rather exhaustive facies classification. However, to understand the large-scale sedimentary and diagenetic characteristics of the study area and simplify our data anal ysis, we have adopted the broader terminology of Lima and De Ros 2019 . Thus, the major facies recognized in the BVF are fascicular calcite crusts shrubs , Mg-claystones with spherulites, laminites, and intraclastic grainstones. 4.1. Facies of the BVF A vast body of literature dealing with the BVF in the Santos Basin exists today, with a relative consensus on its main components and textures, considered as a heterogeneous association of in-situ and reworked constituents Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2020 Herlinger et al., 2017 Tanaka et al., 2018 Farias et al., 2019 Basso et al., 2020 Gomes et al., 2020 . The in-situ facies components are fascicular calcite shrubs , spherulites, microcrystalline calcite, and clay minerals, Table 1 Statistical summary of the average and maximum amounts of major constituents, Mg-clay and secondary porosity, in the main facies of the Barra Velha Formation. GST intraclastic grainstones, SHR fascicular calcite crusts, SPH Mg-claystones with higher spherulites content, MGC Mg-claystones with lower spherulites content, LAM laminites. Lithologic types GST Constituents Average Maximum Average Maximum Average Maximum Average Maximum Average Maximum 45.00 6.50 90.00 32.00 3.00 34.00 30.00 83.00 0.10 3.00 4.00 10.00 1.20 1.60 22.00 33.00 1.00 0.06 4.58 38.00 5.00 34.00 2.00 3.30 2.61 30.00 70.00 34.00 5.00 4.31 0.7 50.00 56.00 52.00 14.00 20.4 2.04 83.00 71.5 50.00 3.00 18.5 1.24 35.00 90.5 67.00 0.04 3.00 0.5 25.00 0.34 8.00 0.03 1.00 0.27 10.00 0.01 1.00 0.21 8.00 0.02 2.00 0.17 5.00 7.34 6.78 93.00 54.00 9.18 4.66 61.00 63.00 24.5 1.04 86.00 51.00 27.00 1.31 86.5 35.5 27.00 1.67 83.00 40.00 0.15 29.5 0.71 35.00 0.94 25.00 0.32 7.00 1.00 35.00 0.001 1.00 0.01 5.00 0.02 2.00 0.005 0.5 2.68 2.08 70.00 53.00 4.25 1.73 65.00 58.00 5.65 0.62 97.00 33.00 6.71 0.39 55.00 15.00 8.91 0.32 72.00 10.00 0.09 11.00 0.63 18.00 0.44 16.00 0.31 5.00 0.24 5.00 0.01 2.00 0.09 8.00 0.03 10.00 0.08 6.00 0.07 3.00 0.07 5.00 0.08 5.00 0.05 4.00 0.13 0.47 0.03 2.00 0.004 2.00 0.01 2.00 0.35 17.00 0.78 30.00 1.15 80.00 0.4 10 2.1 45.00 0.01 11.00 0.01 3.00 0.00 5.00 0.02 3.00 0.17 7.00 0.22 8.00 0.24 6.00 0.11 3.00 0.08 3.00 0.002 1.00 0.03 5.00 0.001 1.00 0.02 5.00 0.001 3.00 0.001 3.00 0.02 3.00 0.47 0.13 0.15 15.00 0.73 27.00 1.59 46.00 0.42 22.00 0.8 25.00 5.00 31.00 5.00 40.00 5.00 24.00 2.00 25.00 4.00 30.00 Calcite Fascicular crusts Spherulites Other Diagenetic phases Mg-clay Syngenetic Calcite Replacing constituents Filling primary porosity Filling secondary dissolution porosity Filling fracture porosity Dolomite Replacing constituents Filling primary porosity Filling secondary dissolution porosity Filling fracture porosity Quartz Replacing constituents Filling primary porosity Filling secondary dissolution porosity Filling fracture porosity Baryte Replacing constituents Filling porosity Celestite Replacing constituents Filling porosity Chalcedony Replacing constituents Filling porosity Cryolite Replacing constituents Filling porosity Dawsonite Replacing constituents Filling porosity Fluorite Replacing constituents Filling porosity Illite smectite Replacing constituents Filling porosity Kaolinite Replacing constituents Filling porosity Magnesite Replacing constituents Filling porosity Secondary dissolution porosity SHR SPH 6 MGC LAM A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 4.1.1. Fascicular calcite crusts shrubs This facies consists of calcite crystals presenting fascicular-optical texture. These crystals grew predominantly in a vertical to sub-vertical orientation, with an average height of 2 mm Fig. 3A . The crystal shrubs have a conical form in the longitudinal section that shows height greater than length Farias et al., 2019 , or in certain layers, incipient forms with a height width ratio of about 1 1. The latter can be seen as morphologically intermediate forms between spherulites and crusts. The fascicular calcite crusts show intercalations with millimetric to centi metric layers of spherulites, re-worked particles indistinct fragments of spherulites and shrubs , microcrystalline calcite, and dolomite, creating a laminated macroscopic aspect, with locally low relief domical forms. Each layered unit can reach 2 m in thickness. The association with spherulites is frequent and can make up 30 of the samples. Minor constituents comprise argillaceous peloids, ostracods bioclasts and Mg-clay laminations, which can be locally incorporated into calcite aggregates Fig. 3B . In 30 of the samples, the Mg-clays appear as interstitial sediment between the carbonate aggregates. The pore system is characterized by growth-framework and inter-crystalline porosity types. The fascicular calcite crusts are not microporous. carbonate, and Mg-clay content. Ostracods, phosphatic fragments and micro-spherulitic calcite are present in small quantities. Fenestral and intercrystalline porosity are common across lamina tion. Microporosity is also frequent and given the remains of organicmatter rich laminae in some samples Fig. 3H , the porosity genera tion could be related to organic matter degradation Farias et al., 2019 . The recrystallization of calcite crystals is frequently observed, and oc casional breccia and teepee structures occur, associated with the cren ulated laminites Fig. 3I . The breccia is poorly sorted, made up of millimetric to centimetric, subangular intraclasts of laminites, in a ma trix of microcrystalline dolomite. Some of the intraclasts are dolomitized and silicified. 4.1.4. Intraclastic grainstones The intraclastic grainstones are the main facies in the study area, representing 44 of the available samples. They are composed pre dominantly of fragments of fascicular calcite crusts, spherulites, lam inites, and different proportions of siliciclastic volcanoclastic grains and Mg-clay intraclasts Fig. 3J L . The carbonate intraclasts are commonly rounded, moderately to well-sorted, with size ranging between fine- and coarse-sand locally very coarse , with tangential to long grain contacts Taylor, 1950 . Sutured and concave-convex contacts are observed but other compaction features fractures, stylolithes, solution seams are rare. This facies has a predominantly massive aspect but may present a normal grading and cross-stratification. Intercalations with centimetre-thick layers of laminites and fascicular calcite crusts are frequent. The association of the different components allows to categorize the grainstones in three different sub-facies, depending on the proportion of these components. Type-A grainstones are dominated by carbonate fragments, with low content or absence of Mg-clays and siliciclastic volcanoclastic grains. They are the most common type Fig. 3J . Type-B grainstones, composed of the most significant content of siliciclastic volcanoclastic grains, generally contain silt-sized detrital constituents quartz, feldspar, and mica and sub-rounded to sub-angular basaltic volcanoclastic fragments Fig. 3K . They display inverse grading and concavo-convex to sutured grain contacts. Finally, type-C grainstones range between a packstone to grainstone texture. They show the most prominent content of Mg-clays both as grains or matrix and are characterized by the presence of ooids, peloids and clay intraclasts Fig. 3L . The Mg-clay content can be partially to totally replaced by calcite. They also show minor amounts of ostracods, phosphatic frag ments, siliciclastic grains, and volcanoclastic rock fragments. 4.1.2. Mg-claystones with spherulites Mg-claystones are characterized by Mg-clays in association with different proportions of calcite spherulites and dolomite Fig. 3C E . For sake of clarity, the different clay minerals that constitute these Mg-clays are characterized in part 4.3.2. The spherulites are spherical to subspherical calcite crystal aggregates with a sweeping extinction and size generally less than 2 mm. Based on the macroscopic description, it is possible to categorize this facies into two distinct sub-facies, depending on the relative proportion of spherulites Mg-claystones with higher proportions of spherulites and Mg-claystones with minor proportions of spherulites. The Mg-claystones with higher proportions of spherulites 34 on average, 83 maximum present variable thickness, between 5 cm and 100 cm and display an irregular planar laminated structure, marked by spherulites and clay laminae, showing a brownish color. The spherulites may occur coalesced and recrystallized Fig. 3C . The Mg-clays are present in 56 of the samples and locally represent 50 of the sample constituents Table 1 . Silt-to sand-size siliciclastic grains of quartz and muscovite are frequent and can occur as nuclei of the spherulites. Minor occurrences of ostracods are also observed. The Mg-clays are commonly displaced by calcite spherulites Fig. 3D and frequently show partial to total dissolution. The dissolution of the clay matrix and spherulites is the primary process generating porosity in this facies, that initially possesses a low reservoir quality. The Mg-claystones with minor proportions of spherulites may exhibit a massive to layered structure Fig. 3E , generally with centimetric bed thickness. Macroscopically, it is characterized by alternations of centi metric claystone layers and laminae with sparse spherulites. The spherulites are observed in 30 of the samples from this sub-facies. When present, they occur as rare, isolated floating grains representing around 3 on average 10 maximum of the constituents. The low occurrence or absence of spherulite in 70 of the samples may be explained by 1 a sampling bias, as sampling was preferentially done in claystone layers 2 the intense dolomitization and replacement by microcrystalline calcite, resulting in the loss of the original fabric. Nevertheless, these two populations were grouped in the same subfacies. 4.2. Facies distribution The well dataset enables the construction of correlation transects, which can help to define the facies distribution and proportions, both in a spatial and temporal point of view Fig. 4 . These profiles were reconstructed based on the basement topography assessed from seismic interpretation Artaga o, 2018 . In the same way, schematic fault pro portions are located on these profiles to represent a simplified scheme of the fault network. These profiles show the existence of a topographic structural high wells W5 and W10 , with a southeastern steep flank wells W11 to W17 and a northwestern low-angle slope W1 to W4 and W6 to W9 . From a spatial point of view, the facies with a large Mg-clay content grainstones with Mg-clays and Mg-claystones with minor proportions of spherulites predominate in lower areas, away from the structural high, and in relatively low areas within the structural high, as in the case of well W4 Fig. 4 . Furthermore, the wells situated in higher structural positions show very low preservation of the Mg-clays, which occurs mainly as ooids and peloids, intensively affected by diagenetic processes as previously reported by Carramal et al., 2022 . The Mg-claystones with high proportions of spherulites predominate in lower and transitional areas and fascicular calcite crusts occur 4.1.3. Laminites This facies is composed of alternating laminae of microcrystalline calcite, microcrystalline dolomite, Mg-clay, organic matter, and detrital components quartz, feldspar, and micas . Macroscopically it is char acterized by plane-parallel flat or crenulated laminations Fig. 3F and G and frequent organic-matter rich laminae. The colors vary between greenish and brownish, depending on the proportion of siliciclastic mud, 7 A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 Fig. 4. Facies spatial and stratigraphic distribution over the three transects A to C, located on the map of the study area and the three stratigraphic units labeled 3 base to 1 top . No interpretation was proposed for Unit 3 of transect C, as this unit pinches out on the basement. The scale of these transects is given on the map. LMC crenulated laminites, GST A intraclastic grainstones, GST B intraclastic grainstone with siliciclastic volcanoclastic content, SHR fascicular calcite crusts, LMT laminites, SPH Mg-claystones with higher spherulites content, GST C intraclastic grainstones with Mg-clay content, MGC Mg-claystones with lower spherulites content. preferentially in the transitional areas and some locations of the struc tural high Fig. 4 . Minor occurrences of spherulites and incipient forms of shrubs with Mg-clays are also observed in lower areas of the depositional profiles. In the studied wells, the proportion of laminites is generally scarce and preferentially distributed in the transitional areas, with minor occurrences in the lower areas. However, crenulated Table 2 Statistical summary of the average and maximum amounts of major diagenetic constituents, Mg-clay, and secondary porosity, in the stratigraphic units of Barra Velha Formation. Stratigraphic unit Unit 1 Constituents Calcite Other diagenetic phases Mg-clay Calcite Dolomite Silica Secondary dissolution porosity Detrital grains Unit 2 Unit 3 Average Maximum Average Maximum Average Maximum Fascicular crusts Spherulites 17.90 17.60 90.00 86.00 16.10 20.20 87.00 85.00 10.20 18.50 84.00 76.00 Syngenetic Replacing constituents Filling primary porosity Filling secondary dissolution porosity Filling fracture porosity Replacing constituents Filling primary porosity Filling secondary dissolution porosity Filling fracture porosity Replacing constituents Filling primary porosity Filling secondary dissolution porosity Filling fracture porosity 9.00 4.50 2.52 0.25 0.09 16.70 4.65 0.68 0.01 5.80 1.70 0.30 0.04 83.00 90.50 34.00 10.00 8.00 86.50 52.00 35.00 5.00 97.00 33.00 16.00 8.00 10.00 3.85 2.82 0.27 0.02 10.70 4.00 0.37 0.001 2.90 1.03 0.24 0.004 93.00 75.00 78.00 25.00 5.00 90.00 63.00 35.00 1.00 78.00 58.00 15.00 1.00 7.00 10.20 4.17 0.33 0.07 11.40 4.30 0.24 1.60 1.60 0.50 0.10 77.00 85.00 52.00 25.50 5.00 93.00 55.00 15.00 25.00 52.00 18.00 10.00 5.00 3.00 40.00 30.00 4.00 4.00 30.00 18.00 3.00 6.00 22.00 34.00 8 A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 laminites occur in Unit 1 of BVF, and mostly on the structural highs. The grainstones are observed along the entire transects, but with variations depending on the grainstone sub-facies. The carbonate intraclastic grainstones occur preferentially on the structural highs, whereas the grainstones with the largest content of Mg-clay are more developed in the lower areas. Finally, the siliciclastic volcanoclastic-dominated grainstones occur mainly in Units 3 and 2, preferentially on the struc tural highs. Regarding the stratigraphic distribution, the most significant pro portions of Mg-claystones with minor proportions of spherulites occur in Units 3 and 2. The Mg-claystones with high amount of spherulites pre dominates in Unit 1. Fascicular calcite crusts and intraclastic grainstones predominate in Unit 1. The latter is marked by a more significant pro portion of fascicular calcite crusts, particularly towards the lower area of transect B. Some sites of the southeast flank show a high proportion of fascicular calcite crusts in Unit 3, as in the case of well W11. Detrital content, mainly associated with laminites, Mg-claystones with spheru lites, and grainstones, generally occurs in low quantities. However, its abundance shows a progressive decrease from Unit 3 to Unit 1 Table 2 . A slight decrease is observed on the structural high Table 3 . minerals represent 90 of the sample s composition. Among the sec ondary minerals Ca-dolomite, K-feldspar, and magnesite are the most representative. The larger and more complete sample dataset analyzed with XRD may explain some differences with the QEMSCAN analyses. According to the XRD analyses, the clay minerals are composed chiefly of kerolite, mixed-layer kerolite Mg-smectite, Mg-smectite, sepiolite, and minor amounts of non-magnesian clay minerals, such as Illite, illite smectite, kaolinite and chlorite Fig. 6A and B . Mg-smectite comprised stevensite and saponite Netto et al., 2022 but their differ entiation implies additional analyses that were not done for our dataset. Fig. 6B shows the association between facies and the different clay species. Kerolite and mixed-layer kerolite Mg-smectite are the main Mgclays observed in the case study Fig. 6A and B . The analyses show that kerolite and mixed-layer kerolite Mg-smectite are present respec tively in 73 and 55 of the Mg-claystones with high amounts of spherulites Supplementary material Fig. A1 . In the intraclastic grain stones, kerolite occurs in 82 of the analyzed samples, whereas mixedlayer kerolite Mg-smectite is only present in 50 of the samples. Ker olite occurs in 70 of the fascicular calcite crusts, whereas mixed-layer kerolite Mg-smectite is present in 40 of the samples. Kerolite is also present in 67 of the samples of laminites facies, but in low proportions 1 10 of each sample , whereas the mixed-layer kerolite Mg-smectite represents more than 50 of the clay fraction in 44 of the samples. Mg-smectites occur mostly related to intraclastic grainstones and fascicular calcite crusts, being present in 20 of the samples and in those cases representing more than 50 of the clay fraction Fig. 6B . Sepiolite is rare, being present preferentially in fascicular calcite crusts where it is present in less than 10 of the samples and representing 1 10 of the clay fraction or in Mg-claystones with spherulites present in less than 5 of the samples and representing 1 10 of the clay fraction . It is absent in the other facies Fig. 6B . Non-magnesian clay minerals are mainly illite-smectite and illite. These clays occur in small quantities in about 50 of all the samples, except for the laminites where illite-smectite is only present in 15 of the samples but representing more than 50 of the clay fraction 4.3. Facies and clay mineralogy 4.3.1. QEMSCAN analysis The mineralogical composition of 92 samples from 5 wells located in different structural positions has been mapped using the QEMSCAN system. The samples consist mainly of calcite, dolomite, quartz, and Mgclays, the latter varying significantly in proportion depending on the well position in the study area, reaching a maximum of 50 in distal wells. The sum of the trace minerals represents average quantities of 3 and the most common are presented in Fig. 5. 4.3.2. XRD analysis Clay minerals occur in different proportions in the described facies, but also with different mineralogy. Bulk-rock X-Ray Diffraction XRD analyses show that the sum of calcite, dolomite, quartz, and clay Table 3 Statistical summary of the average and maximum amounts of major diagenetic constituents, Mg-clay, and secondary porosity of Barra Velha Formation, in different portions of the study area. Regions Lower Transitional Higher Constituents Average Maximum Average Maximum Average Maximum Average Maximum Fascicular crusts 12.5 83.0 13.4 87.0 17.5 90.0 20.0 84.0 Spherulites 26.7 86.0 14.5 72.0 14.0 66.0 12.8 62.0 Syngenetic Replacing constituents Filling primary porosity Filling secondary dissolution porosity Filling fracture porosity Replacing constituents Filling primary porosity Filling secondary dissolution porosity Filling fracture porosity Replacing constituents Filling primary porosity Filling secondary dissolution porosity Filling fracture porosity Replacing constituents Filling porosity Replacing constituents Filling porosity Replacing constituents Filling porosity 10.0 5.2 0.39 0.08 17.5 2.08 0.2 0.006 3.82 0.64 0.5 0.03 0.03 75.0 90.5 30.0 8.0 5.0 86.0 45.0 10.0 2.0 97.0 27.0 16.0 3.0 3.5 6.0 10.48 1.51 0.77 0.01 19.0 2.6 0.79 0.004 4.76 1.07 0.38 0.04 0.06 51.0 75.0 52.0 25.5 1.5 93.0 30.0 30.0 0.5 78.0 53.0 12.0 3.0 4.0 1.0 5.8 3.5 0.25 0.04 13.6 3.4 0.76 0.02 3.09 0.76 0.29 0.12 0.12 39.0 70.0 67.0 10.0 3.0 86.5 51.0 35.0 5.0 70.0 15.0 15.0 8.0 7.0 1.0 3.0 4.12 0.05 0.09 10.2 6.5 0.5 0.001 4.8 2.3 0.21 0.03 0.07 42.0 85.0 78.0 5.0 8.0 90.0 63.0 35.0 1.0 72.0 58.0 18.0 10.0 5.0 0.5 40.0 1.0 35.0 2.4 70.0 0.9 80.0 0.03 4.0 0.07 5.0 0.05 3.0 0.3 6.0 Secondary dissolution porosity 3.0 25.0 3.0 17.0 5.0 28.0 6.0 40.0 Detrital grains 4.0 34.0 4.0 30.0 3.0 13.0 3.0 30.0 Calcite Other diagenetic phases Mg-clay Calcite Dolomite Silica Baryte Chalcedony Dawsonite 9 Flank section C A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 Fig. 5. Boxplots showing the diversity and amounts of accessory minerals encountered in the Barra Velha Formation, based on QEMSCAN analyses. A Proportions of trace minerals. B Proportions of minor minerals. Fig. 6. A NW-SE transect showing the spatial and stratigraphic distribution of clay minerals XRD . The dashed line represents the Intra-Alagoas unconformity. B Clay mineral composition per facies SHR fascicular calcite crusts, GST intraclastic grainstones, SPH Mg-claystones with high spherulite content, MGC Mgclaystones with low spherulite content, LAM laminites . The black rectangle on the last diagram is a reading example for the samples identified as laminites facies, 33 do not present kerolite, and 67 present between 1 and 10 of kerolite. Fig. 6A . Other minor occurrences of non-magnesian clays in the basin include kaolinite and chlorite. In terms of stratigraphic distribution, Mg-smectite predominates in Unit 3 and in the lower areas Fig. 6A . Kerolite and mixed layer kerolite Mg-smectite contents increase in Units 2 and 1. The highest proportions of kerolite occur in Unit 1, whereas the highest content of mixed-layer kerolite Mg-smectite occurs in Unit 2, mostly in wells sit uated in lower areas of the transects. Sepiolite occurs in small quantities in Unit 2, in well W4 higher domain Fig. 6A . 4.4. Other diagenetic constituents In the studied carbonate succession, a complex interplay of sedi mentary and diagenetic processes occurred, and it is somehow difficult to put a strict boundary between near-surface and burial diagenesis. We followed the diagenetic sequences proposed by Herlinger et al. 2017 and Lima and De Ros 2019 , which considered fascicular calcite crusts as essentially syngenetic and spherulites as eogenetic products. Other post-depositional phases are also associated with early diagenesis or 10 A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 even late diagenesis. fracture-infill Fig. 7H . Finally, the fifth type is coarse-crystalline saddle dolomite formed of anhedral to subhedral prismatic crystals with sweeping extinction and curved crystal faces Fig. 7I . Laminites and Mg-claystones with spherulites show the highest contents of dolomite Table 1 . Dolomite is one of the major constituents in the laminites, being present in 93 of the samples Supplementary material Fig. A2 . Pore-filling, microcrystalline dolomite occurs in 22 of the samples, but only in small amounts. In the Mg-claystones with higher proportions of spherulites, the dolomite occurs in 94 of the samples showing an average amount of 25 . In these samples, the main dolomite fabric is rhombohedral, followed in relative order of impor tance by microcrystalline and lamellar aggregates. As a pore-filling cement phase, dolomite is present in 22 of the samples. Mgclaystones with minor proportions of spherulites shows Mg-clay replacement by dolomite in 90 of the samples, representing average proportions around 27 per sample, mainly of microcrystalline and rhombohedral types. In fascicular calcite crusts, dolomites occur mainly with its rhom bohedral form Fig. 7D and as microcrystalline mosaics, with minor occurrences of saddle dolomite. The amount of dolomite per sample can reach 63 Table 1 , with average values that vary around 13 per sample. The main form of dolomite occurrence is as replacement of interstitial Mg-clay and shrubs, being present in 66 of the samples, 4.4.1. Dolomite Dolomite is one of the most common diagenetic constituents observed in thin sections, occurring with five main fabrics. The first type, only observed locally, forms lamellar aggregates Fig. 7A , 30 50 m in thickness and composed of fibrous dolomite and magnesite. Some dolomite rhombs grew on the lamellar dolomite. The second type is microcrystalline dolomite, which consists of very fine subhedral crystals 15 60 m replacing spherulites and Mg-clays Fig. 7B , as well as the laminites facies, giving a recrystallized mottled aspect. The third type, called rhombohedral dolomite, occurs as well-developed euhedral rhombs 25 100 m in diameter that can display concentric zonation, and that are commonly arranged in a scattered floating pattern in Mgclays, with evidence of displacive growth Fig. 7C . In a few samples, it occurs in the growth-framework porosity of fascicular crusts, showing a tighter idiotopic texture, with no or very rare remnants of clays and a secondary intercrystalline porosity Fig. 7D . The fourth type is granular mosaic dolomite, that consists of anhedral to subhedral, fine to coarse crystals 0,25 to 1 mm generally affecting pervasively the original facies, replacing original calcite grains spherulites, intraclasts ... and growing as a pore-filling cement in the primary porosity Fig. 7E G . This dolomite type also co-occurs with macrocrystalline quartz as Fig. 7. Photomicrographs highlighting different dolomite types of Barra Velha Formation A Lamellar aggregates. The red arrow highlights dolomite rhombs plane-polarized light PPL B Very fine dolomite crystals replacing calcite spherulites and possibly matrix crossed-polarized light XPL . Note the spherulite partially replaced by quartz red arrow C Rhombohedral dolomite replacing Mg-clay PPL D Fascicular calcite crusts with rhombohedral dolomite cement XPL E In-situ facies with anhedral dolomite cement. The red arrows highlight the carbonate constituents replaced by dolomite PPL F Grainstone with medium to coarse granular mosaic dolomite indistinct cement and replacement phase PPL G Grainstone with fine granular dolomite cement PPL H Fascicular calcite crusts intensely replaced by dolomite and quartz. The red arrows highlight the filling of the pore-fracture by dolomite and quartz XPL I In-situ facies with saddle dolomite. Note the sweeping extinction red arrow XPL . For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. 11 A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 with average values of 9 per sample. Pore-filling dolomite cement predominates in the intraclastic grain stones and fascicular calcite crusts, representing a key process of porosity reduction. Dolomite cement occurs in 73 of the intraclastic grainstone samples, with average quantities of 7 per sample, and up to 54 per sample Table 1 . It is represented by rhombohedral and granular mosaic types, and locally by saddle dolomite. 44 of the fascicular calcite crusts display dolomite cement which may reach up to 63 per sample. to bladed crystals are observed as a coating around grains, in grainstones facies Fig. 8B . Rims are associated mainly with Mg-clay ooids Fig. 8C . The coarse-crystalline calcite is composed of medium to coarse 100 500 m , anhedral to subhedral crystals, filling the porosity in a granular, equant mosaic fabric Fig. 8C . This calcite grows in facies that have previously undergone compaction, attested by the concave-convex sutures between grains Fig. 8D . Finally, minor amounts of coarse euhedral crystals, poikilotopic and blocky calcites are also recognized, as a cement phase, essentially filling fractures Fig. 8E . This blocky calcite engulfs the saddle dolomite cement, thus postdating it Fig. 8F . Diagenetic calcite occurs mainly in laminites, Mg-claystones, and grainstones facies Table 1, supplementary material Fig. A3 . Crypto crystalline to fine-crystalline calcite is present in about 40 of the laminites and claystones samples, with more than 30 as a replacement phase. Calcite pore-filling cement is common in grainstones Fig. 8B and C , with 20 of the samples presenting more than 10 of calcite cement. Mosaic calcite occurs in 42 of the samples, and calcite rims in 10 of the samples. In the fascicular calcite crusts, different types of diagenetic calcite are present in 47 of the samples, occurring similarly as a cement and a replacement phase. The most common fabrics observed in the fascicular calcite crusts are, in order of relative impor tance, medium to coarse-crystalline mosaic cement phase , finecrystalline calcite replacement and coarse euhedral blocky calcites cement . Minor occurrences of blocky calcite filling fractures and rims 4.4.2. Calcite Even considered eodiagenetic in origin Herlinger et al., 2017 Lima and De Ros, 2019 , the spherulites have been described in Sections 4.1.2 and 4.2, as a main component of the Mg-claystones with spherulites facies. Besides the fascicular and spherulitic aggregates, diagenetic calcite occurs also in four various fabrics 1 crypto-to fine crystalline form 2 as rim cement 3 as a coarse-crystalline, granular mosaic and 4 as a blocky cement mostly filling fractures. Cryptocrystalline to fine crystalline calcite Fig. 8A , is formed of inclusion-rich, subhedral crystals 10 20 m or crystal clusters, that mimic the original facies texture or allochems lamination, spherulites ... , suggesting a replacement process. In some samples, this crystalline fabric is dominant, leading to partial or total recrystallization of the original host. Rarely, calcite rims, 10 30 m thick, formed of prismatic Fig. 8. A Mg-clay partially replaced by very fine calcite and dolomite crystals crossed-polarized light, XPL B Grainstone constituents with calcite rims. Note the dissolution of the carbonate intraclasts plane-polarized light, PPL C Grainstone with fragments of shrubs, spherulites, showing silica rims and Mg-clay envelops red arrow . The yellow arrow highlights mosaic calcite filling porosity, the green arrow highlights calcite coating around grains XPL D Grainstone with blocky calcite cement PPL E Poikilotopic calcite, filling fracture XPL , partially replaced by chalcedony red arrow F In-situ facies with blocky calcite engulfing saddle dolomite cement PPL G In-situ facies with intense silicification XPL H Fascicular calcite crust with quartz cement. Note the quartz replacing the fascicular calcite red arrows I Grainstone with silica rims red arrow and macrocrystalline quartz cement XPL . For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. 12 A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 can be seen in up to 10 of the samples. calcite crusts and intraclastic grainstones Fig. 8G and H . The pro portions are similar in both facies Table 1 and quartz as a pore-filling phase is present in 40 of the fascicular calcite crusts samples and in 35 of the grainstone samples. 4.4.3. Silica Silica is common in the BVF and displays four main different fabrics. Crypto-to microcrystalline silica is the most frequent silica phase, forming drusy aggregates that partially to totally silicified calcite spherulites Fig. 7B , and mimetically replaced Mg-clay matrix. The silica replacement can be fabric selective e.g., it is confined within selected grains or non-selective Fig. 8G . This phase can also fill growth-framework porosity between fascicular calcite crusts Fig. 8H . Reworked silicified spherulites and intraclasts in the grainstone facies tend to indicate an early process of silicification. Microcrystalline silica is generally associated with microporosity. Quartz rims 20 50 m thick are observed locally, forming coatings around grains made of prismatic to bladed crystals Fig. 8C and I . These rims predate the development of coarse-crystalline mosaic calcite Fig. 8C . The similar crystalline fabric, scale, occurrence in grainstone facies suggest a possible replacement of calcite rims by silica. The third type is macro crystalline quartz, composed of subhedral to anhedral crystals, 30 100 m in diameter, that form a coarse mosaic cement filling pores Fig. 8I and also observed as fracture infills. It is unclear if this phase may also be replacive. Last, a chalcedony phase with a fibrous radiated fabric is observed and partially engulfs and replaces the coarse-crystalline mosaic and the blocky calcites Figs. 8E and 9A . The laminites contains the largest amount of silica, primarily as a replacement phase, being present in 70 of the samples Supplementary material Fig. A4 . Centimetric tabular laminae and nodules of silica, evolved in a few cases to pervasive silicification. Microcrystalline quartz is the most common silica form in laminites, followed by chalcedony and macrocrystalline mosaic quartz. The replacement of Mg-clays and calcite spherulites by silica is also frequently observed and occurs mainly as microcrystalline and macro crystalline mosaic quartz. In the Mg-claystones with higher spherulite contents, silicification is observed in 75 of the samples. In the fascic ular calcite crusts, the replacement reaches a maximum of 65 of the samples, but in general, the proportion per sample is low, with an average of 4 . Chalcedony is accessory and mainly replaces spherulites and fascicular calcite. As for calcite, pore-filling silica is more important in the fascicular 4.4.4. Minor diagenetic phases Minor occurrences of replacive and pore-filling minerals including barite, celestite, cryolite, dawsonite, fluorite, illite smectite, kaolinite, and magnesite have been observed Table 1 . Magnesite, dawsonite and barite are the most frequent. Magnesite is present in 25 of the Mgclaystones with spherulites and occurs as lamellar aggregates replac ing and filling shrinkage pores in the Mg-clays. Dawsonite occurs mostly associated with fascicular calcite crusts and spherulites Fig. 9B and barite occurs mainly as a cement phase in intraclastic grainstones and fascicular calcite crusts Fig. 9C . 4.4.5. Dissolution and fractures Secondary porosity is generated by the dissolution of both Mg-clays and carbonate constituents. Dissolution of carbonate intraclasts gener ated intraparticle and moldic porosity on intraclastic grainstones Fig. 8B . In fascicular calcite crusts, dissolution generated intraframework porosity. In these facies, the enlargement of interparticle and growth-framework pores is also common, creating larger vugs Fig. 9D . In laminites facies, a matrix microporosity is observed Fig. 9E as well as a fenestral porosity, locally enlarged due to disso lution. In Mg-claystones, porosity formation is specially related to Mgclay dissolution Fig. 9F , although the dissolution of spherulites is significant in some samples. Dissolution of pore-filling calcite cement phase is common, generating intracrystalline porosity. Porosity gener ated by dissolution is observed in different proportions in all the facies, although preferentially affecting fascicular calcite crusts, Mg-claystones with spherulites, and intraclastic grainstones Table 1 . Late cement phases filling secondary dissolution pores are often observed, mainly in fascicular calcite crusts and Mg-claystones with spherulites. In fascicular calcite crusts, late cements can consist of 35 of dolomite, and 25 of calcite. Fractures are observed mainly in intraclastic grainstones and fascicular calcite crusts and are frequently filled by a cement of quartz and calcite. However, the occurrence in the samples is local. Fig. 9. A Grainstone with coarse mosaic calcite, replaced by chalcedony crossed polarized light XPL B Fascicular calcite crusts with cement of dawsonite and euhedral dolomite plane-polarized light, PPL C Cement of dawsonite and euhedral dolomite PPL D Growth-framework porosity enlarged by dissolution PPL E General aspects of dissolution in laminites F General aspects of dissolution on Mg-claystones with spherulites PPL . 13 A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 4.5. Distribution of the diagenetic phases and dissolution Dolomite fabrics also spatially vary. The highest amounts and pro portion per sample of rhombohedral dolomite are observed in lower areas Fig. 14 . Rhombohedral dolomite is widely found associated with Mg-claystones with spherulites and fascicular calcite crusts facies. Medium-crystalline mosaic dolomite has similar proportions in all the facies and is most common on the structural highs. An important in crease of mosaic dolomite is observed in Unit 1. Microcrystalline dolo mite is also abundant, prevailing in the laminites, and transitional areas Fig. 14 . The other dolomite types occur locally but can reach 90 in some samples, as in the case of saddle dolomite. The proportion of lamellar dolomite magnesite is in general, very low, but it is possible to observe a preferential association of lamellar aggregates with fascicular calcite crusts and spherulitic facies. Calcite cementation generally occurs in the highest structural parts, and on the southeastern flank Figs. 11A and 12A . It is also more abundant in Units 2 and 3, in the central region transect B Fig. 11 , associated with reworked facies intraclastic grainstones . Other major occurrences are observed in Unit 1, associated with crenulated lam inites. The coarse-crystalline mosaic and blocky calcites are more developed in the southeast flank. Although the calcite rims occur in small proportion, they are also more frequent in the southeast flank and on the structural high. Silica does not present any peculiar spatial distribution, although it is The results of petrographic observations and quantification were set in the studied wells, organized along two dip transects, perpendicular to the structural high Figs. 10 and 11 and one strike transect along the SE flank, parallel to the structural high Fig. 12 . Vertical sampling spacing varies from 30 cm to 5 m, with an average spacing of 50 cm. The dataset enables the characterization of the lateral and vertical distribution of the main diagenetic phases Fig. 13 . The northeastern region of the study area transect A, Fig. 10 shows a higher proportion of dolomite in the transitional zone and towards the structural high. This increase is associated with the replacement of the constituents, and partially with a pore-filling cement phase Fig. 10A and B . Conversely, in the central portion of the study area, represented by transect B, dolomitization increases towards the lower area, espe cially in Unit 1 Fig. 11B . Dolomitization is also intense in the wells of the southeast flank, both in Units 2 and 1 Fig. 12B . In this area, dolomite cement is frequent Fig. 12A , mostly in intraclastic grain stones. The increase of dolomite in lower sites, as observed in transect B Fig. 11 , may be related to differences in the structural pattern of the study area. The region of well W6 is marked by a higher relief bounded by faults Figs. 1C and 11 , creating a distinct depositional setting compared with the northwest portion. Fig. 10. NW-SE correlation along transect A showing the quantitative distribution of the main diagenetic minerals in the study area. A Boxplots of calcite, dolomite, and quartz pore-filling cement proportions. B Vertical distribution of Mg-clay, diagenetic minerals sum of the replacement and cementation and dissolution. Values vary between 0 and 80 per sample for the Mg-clay and diagenetic minerals and between 0 and 60 for the dissolution process. The gamma ray log GR is also plotted. The profile morphology was reconstructed based on the BVF basal boundary assessed from seismic interpretation Artaga o, 2018 , corroborated with the well data that reach the BVF boundary. 14 A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 Fig. 11. NW-SE correlation along transect B showing the quantitative distribution of the main diagenetic minerals in the study area. A Boxplots of calcite, dolomite, and quartz pore-filling cement proportions. B Vertical distribution of Mg-clay, diagenetic minerals sum of the replacement and cementation and dissolution. Values vary between 0 and 80 per sample for the Mg-clay and diagenetic minerals and between 0 and 60 for the dissolution process. The gamma ray log GR is also plotted. The profile morphology was reconstructed based on the BVF basal boundary assessed from seismic interpretation Artaga o, 2018 , corroborated with the well data that reach the BVF basal boundary. possible to observe higher proportions in Unit 1 Fig. 12 , preferentially in the laminites facies, and along the southeastern flank, essentially as a cement phase Fig. 11B . Chalcedony is found mainly in Mg-claystones with spherulites and in fascicular calcite crusts on the southeastern flank and the structural high, and occasionally in the lower areas Table 3 . Among other diagenetic phases, dawsonite and barite are the most frequent, both occurring as replacement and cement. Dawsonite follows the same distribution pattern as chalcedony, while barite occurs primarily as a cement phase on the southeastern flank, mainly in Unit 1. Dissolution increases towards the structural high Figs. 10 and 11 and is widely observed in the southeastern flank Fig. 12 . In the lower areas, dissolution is important only in Unit 1. In this stratigraphic unit, Mg-claystones with spherulites show major dissolution features, as well as the laminites. The largest occurrences of vuggy pores are also concentrated in Unit 1, mainly associated with fascicular calcite crusts in the higher area of the depositional profile. In the southeastern flank, dissolution frequently occurs in both Units 1 and 2. A punctual increase in Unit 3 of well W6 is also observed Fig. 11 . Post-dissolution cementation is localized and occurs mainly in the transitional and higher areas. Average porosity values generated by dissolution are low Tables 2 and 3 , but this represents only the dissolution porosity quantified by petrography. At a larger scale, core description shows that dissolution is intense and pervasive in the wells situated in the structural highs, where it can be associated with fracturing. The statistical analysis of the petrographic data indicates this general trend of dissolution. 4.6. Geochemistry 4.6.1. Bulk oxygen and carbon isotopic analysis The bulk sample values of 13C vary between 1.35 and 4.42 , with median and average values of 2.51 and 2.36 respectively, and most of the data presenting positive values. The values of 18O vary between 5.93 and 5.26 , with median and average values of 1.39 and 1.42 , respectively. In contrast to the 13C data, the 18O dis plays more negative values, especially in well W6. The bulk sample values of 13C and 18O, categorized by facies and stratigraphic units are shown in Fig. 15A and B. As bulk analyses are problematic to interpret, data were sorted given their dominant mineralogy, and a selection of samples were realized Table 4 samples with more than 70 of the carbonate phase being calcite mostly fascicular calcite or spherulites and samples with more than 70 of the carbonate phase being dolomite mostly microcrystalline and rhombohedral dolomite . The isotopic data do not show any good covariant trend, whatever the facies, the domi nant mineralogy, or the stratigraphic unit Table 4 . Concerning the calcite values, no specific pattern is observed be tween the stable isotopes and the different facies Fig. 15C . The data show lower variation ranges for 13C than for 18O values. A good cor relation is observed with stratigraphic units. In Unit 3, at the base of the succession, the low number of samples precludes to make an accurate evaluation of the data, although a few samples show the lowest values with average 18O values ranging from 0.69 to 0.21 and average 13C from 0.95 to 1.28 . Unit 2 displays the highest 18O values up to 15 A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 Fig. 12. NW-SE correlation along transect C showing the quantitative distribution of the main diagenetic minerals in the study area. A Boxplots of calcite, dolomite, and quartz pore-filling cement proportions. B Vertical distribution of Mg-clay, diagenetic minerals sum of the replacement and cementation and dissolution. Values vary between 0 and 80 per sample for the Mg-clay and diagenetic minerals and between 0 and 60 for the dissolution process. The gamma ray log GR is also plotted. The profile morphology was reconstructed based on the BVF boundary assessed from seismic interpretation Artaga o, 2018 , corroborated with the well data that reach the BVF boundary. Fig. 13. Scheme showing the lateral and vertical distribution of the main diagenetic phases in the study area. Purple line represents the Intra-Alagoas unconformity between Unit 3 and 2 and the blue line represents the boundary between Units 2 and 1. For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. 16 A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 Fig. 14. Boxplots showing the distribution of the different types of dolomite, in different parts of the study area and stratigraphic units. No data was collected for Unit 3 in the higher area, as it pinches out. The data of Unit 3 in the flank region are from well W11. 2.53 and moderate to high average 13C from 1.56 to 2.80 . Finally, Unit 1, at the top of the succession is characterized by signifi cantly lower 18O values compared to Unit 2 from 0.62 to 1.82 but with the highest average 13C values 2.63 2.84 . In this latter unit, it must be noted that a slightly increasing trend of both 18O and 13C average values is observed between the laminites, Mg-claystones with spherulites and shrubs facies. Nevertheless, the 13C and 18O patterns depend on the location of the wells on the depositional profile Fig. 16 . In well W4, situated on a lower area within the structural high, the 13C values are relatively constant, while the 18O values present significant differences between the Units 1 and 2. Relative to mineralogy, the highest values of 18O are associated with the intervals with high Mg-clay content. In well W5, situated on a higher structural position, a change in 13C pattern is observed, with higher values in the Unit 1, whereas 18O data show a minor variation. The amount of XRD data in well W5 is insufficient to correlate the isotopic data with mineralogy. The dolomite values show a more scattered distribution Fig. 15D . As for calcite, no clear relationship is observed between the isotopic signatures and the different facies. The laminites and the type-B grain stones, dominated by microcrystalline dolomites, shows relatively lower 13C and 18O average values, compared to the other facies, both in Units 1 and 2. The other facies, rather dominated by rhombohedral dolomite show the same stratigraphic trends than for calcite. Thus, Unit 2 shows the highest 18O values up to 3.28 and highly variable average 13C from 0.50 to 2,64 , while Unit 1 is characterized by lower 18O values from 0.17 to 1.64 but with the highest average 13C values 1.42 2.72 . exerted a strong influence on the diagenetic pathways of these sediments Herlinger et al., 2017 . For example, the role of biological factors related to Mg-clays and dolomite precipitation has been addressed by Burne et al. 2014 , Pace et al. 2016 , or Kirkham and Tucker 2018 both in the pre-salt formation or in other cases. Other studies considered part of the dolomite as a product of neomorphism of a microbially-influenced metastable precursor Gomes et al., 2020 or formed within extracellular polymeric substances EPS Sartorato, 2018 . However, for other authors, the lack of direct textural or isotopic evidence for microbial deposits in most of the BVF, except for the up permost meters of the formation, is evidence of dominant abiotic pro cesses. The abiotic models emphasized not only the scarcity of microbial features but the role of Mg-clay as a source of elements, essentially for dolomite and silica precipitation Wright and Barnett, 2015 Tosca and Wright, 2015 Farias et al., 2019 . Although these processes have been extensively described and interpreted, very few papers Wright and Barnett, 2020 Gomes et al., 2020 Carramal et al., 2022 have integrated a quantitative approach combined with spatial and stratigraphic distri bution and elaborated on the relations between this distribution and the depositional or structural setting. This will be developed in the following discussion. 5.1. Syndepositional processes 5.1.1. Mg-clays In our study area, Mg-clays are abundant, and rocks essentially constituted by them can reach 150 m in thickness in some wells, being in line with the extensive Mg-clay occurrences described in the West Af rican and eastern Brazilian Margins Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2020 Tosca and Wright, 2015 Saller et al., 2016 Sabato Ceraldi and Green, 2016 Herlinger et al., 2017 Farias et al., 2019 Lima and De Ros, 2019 Gomes et al., 2020 . Moreover, the current Mg-clay content only rep resents a fraction of the original content, considering the extent of its replacement by microcrystalline and cryptocrystalline calcite, dolomite, 5. Interpretation and discussion The BVF is mainly constituted by a limited mineral assemblage, composed essentially of calcite, dolomite, silica, and Mg-clays. Different biological or chemical controls on mineral precipitation may have 17 A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 Fig. 15. 18O vs. 13C crossplots. A Bulk values per facies B Bulk values per stratigraphic units C Samples dominated by calcite D Samples dominated by dolomite. For C and D , points correspond to the average values of 18O and 13C for the different facies and stratigraphic units. The horizontal and vertical bars correspond to the first and third quartile of each dataset when available . SPH Mg-claystones with higher spherulite content, MGC Mg-claystones with lower spherulites content, LAM laminites, SHR fascicular calcite crusts, GST grainstones of different types A, B, C . in Unit 2. Moreover, it seems that high 18O values measured on car bonates are associated with samples in which the highest Mg-clay con tent is found i.e., well W4 . The high isotopic values, both in 13C and 18O may suggest 1 a lesser diagenetic alteration, as diagenesis would tend to decrease 18O values Lima and De Ros, 2019 2 evaporitic conditions Talbot, 1990 Farias et al., 2019 and correlative evaporative concentrations of the water, also favoring Mg-clay precipitation and preservation Pozo and Calvo, 2018 Gala n and Pozo, 2011 . Vertical partitioning is also observed for the clay mineralogy, with Mg-smectite dominant in Unit 3 passing upward to dominantly mixed layer kerolite Mg-smectite and kerolite in Units 2 and 1. This Mg-clay dis tribution suggests a gradual change in the water chemistry as the genesis of the different types of Mg-clays is conditioned by variations in pH, salinity, and Si Mg ratio Jones and Galan, 1988 Carramal et al., 2022 Netto et al., 2022 . Netto et al. 2022 recognized a similar vertical trend and silica, as well as their dissolution Herlinger et al., 2017 Lima and De Ros, 2019 . Jones and Galan 1988 and Tosca and Wright 2015 suggested that the factors controlling the formation of Mg-rich clays are pH alkalinity , pCO2, and salinity and that the specific chemical conditions required for their precipitation could be achieved rapidly and with large lateral extensions through evaporative concentration. Biological materials, such as microbial cells or extracellular polymeric substances EPS , could also act as substrates for Mg-silicate nucleation by lowering the interfacial energies for Mg-silicate precipitation Tosca and Wright, 2015 . The identification of Mg-clays in association with biofilms and microbial carbonate is reported in some works Tosca et al., 2011 Burne et al., 2014 Perri et al., 2018 . In our case study, the facies with the highest preserved Mg-clay content Mg-claystones with minor proportions of spherulites occurs 18 A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 Table 4 18O and 13C Avg. average value, Q1 first quartile, Q3 third quartile for each facies and stratigraphic units when available , for samples dominated by calcite and dolomite. Correlation coefficients are calculated for each series when number of samples n are sufficient. CALCITE DOLOMITE Name n d18O - Avg. Q1 Q3 d13C - Avg. Q1 Q3 Correl. coef. SPH - UNIT 1 SPH - UNIT 2 SPH - UNIT 3 STV - UNIT 2 LAM - UNIT 1 SHR - UNIT 1 SHR - UNIT 2 SHR - UNIT 3 GST-A - UNIT 1 GST-A - UNIT 2 GST-A - UNIT 3 GST-B - UNIT 2 GST-C - UNIT 1 GST-C - UNIT 2 SPH - UNIT 1 SPH - UNIT 2 STV - UNIT 1 STV - UNIT 2 LAM - UNIT 1 LAM - UNIT 2 SHR - UNIT 1 SHR - UNIT 2 GST-A - UNIT 1 GST-A - UNIT 2 GST-A - UNIT 3 GST-B - UNIT 1 GST-B - UNIT 2 GST-C - UNIT 1 GST-C - UNIT 2 24 12 1 1 10 44 13 2 11 2 2 2 17 6 23 7 12 2 15 1 3 2 30 9 1 5 5 35 21 1.73 2.53 0.69 1.69 1.67 1.82 2.16 0.21 0.66 2.04 0.42 1.63 0.62 1.37 1.64 3.28 0.49 3.03 0.99 0.82 1.50 2.54 0.87 2.65 0.67 0.17 0.67 0.96 2.57 1.15 2.07 1.04 0.90 1.90 0.51 0.71 1.73 0.88 1.24 0.38 1.07 0.75 2.88 0.15 2.64 0.42 1.42 2.25 0.51 1.92 0.86 0.36 0.58 1.84 2.29 3.02 2.99 2.33 3.09 0.08 1.09 2.35 0.05 2.02 0.77 1.74 2.73 3.60 1.29 3.43 2.43 1.56 2.82 1.47 2.89 0.88 0.86 1.38 3.00 2.81 2.40 1.28 1.56 2.63 2.84 2.28 1.28 2.65 2.80 0.95 2.48 2.81 2.67 1.90 1.55 1.42 1.84 1.99 1.92 2.05 0.50 2.35 2.48 0.82 2.42 1.77 2.72 2.64 2.64 2.00 2.25 2.56 2.09 1.01 2.42 2.75 0.65 2.17 2.51 2.46 1.51 1.39 1.22 1.84 1.16 1.73 0.07 2.20 2.33 2.16 1.86 2.53 2.27 3.15 2.79 3.19 3.13 2.85 1.56 3.03 2.85 1.24 2.79 3.10 2.87 2.43 1.94 1.86 1.85 2.69 2.49 0.93 2.80 2.79 2.31 2.38 2.90 2.84 0.14 0.65 0.34 0.34 0.02 0.26 0.51 0.84 0.31 0.21 0.13 0.66 0.99 0.28 0.28 0.62 0.89 0.16 0.11 of the Mg-clay minerals in samples from a well located in the Outer High structure of the Santos Basin. They interpreted the predominance of Mg-smectite stevensite in the lower part of the stratigraphic succession as due to early evaporative conditions while the precipitation of kerolite in the upper part would be related to the presence of relatively more diluted waters. Stevensite stability is favored by high salinity and pH and low to moderate Si Mg ratios, while the kerolite stability is favored by moderate salinity, pH between 8 and 8.5, and low Si Mg ratio, with transitions from one to the other represented by kerolite-stevensite interstratified minerals Gala n and Pozo, 2011 . Tosca and Masterson 2014 even suggested a broader range of pH for kerolite formation, reaching higher values of 9.4. In this case, the Si Mg ratio would be one of the main factors for kerolite precipitation. According to these obser vations, the Mg-clays trend could indicate a variation in the detrital contribution in the basin, since kerolite formation is favored in envi ronments with low detrital sediment input Deocampo, 2015 . This hypothesis is supported by the detrital grain abundance increase in Unit 3 and distribution of the grainstones with siliciclastic volcanoclastic grains that are observed in Units 3 and 2, in the vicinity of the structural high, directly overlying the fractured substratum explaining the abundance of volcanoclastic siliciclastic material . The sources of sol utes in the pre-salt lake are not evident, with potential sources including leaching and erosion of flood basalts outside the rift, enhanced by hy drothermal activity Szatmari and Milani, 2016 Farias et al., 2019 intrabasinal magmatism Szatmari et al., 2016 Wright, 2022 felsic rocks from the basement, in contact with groundwaters Pietchz et al., 2018 marine seepage through the Walvis Ridge volcanic barrier Farias et al., 2019 mantle exhumation and serpentinization Tosca and Wright, 2015 Pinto et al., 2017 Lima et al., 2020 . Despite the low proportion of terrigenous input in the basin, the higher contribution of detrital grains in Unit 3 and its progressive decrease indicates a change in the lake s water recharge pattern that could influence the Mg-clays type precipitation. A higher amount of non-magnesian clay minerals observed in laminites, intraclastic grainstones, and Mg-claystones with spherulites can also be associated with areas and periods characterized by higher detrital input. From a spatial point of view, the facies with the largest preserved Mgclay content predominate in lower areas, away from the structural high, and in relative lows within the high, as in the case of well W4. In these areas, Mg-clay occurs as very fine laminated fabrics, associated with a low amount of spherulites. On the contrary, the wells of transects A and B located on the structural high, as well as on its eastern flank transect C , are characterized by very low content of Mg-clays, which occurs mainly as intraclasts and ooids. Such differences could be due to a sys tem of different small and isolated lakes with no or only episodic lateral connection Farias et al., 2019 . However, the lateral continuity of the different seismic reflectors and stratigraphic units of the BVF Wright and Barnett, 2017 point to a unique large lake, at least at field scale. Changes in hydrodynamic conditions are supported by the very fine laminated fabrics deposited and well-preserved in low-energy environ ments, localized in lower areas, and ooids associated with high-energy conditions, predominating in higher areas of the depositional profile Lima and De Ros, 2019 Basso et al., 2020 Carramal et al., 2022 . The scarcity of Mg-clays in these settings could also be related to lesser preservation and a stronger diagenetic alteration, owing to variable physico-chemical conditions in such places. The high sensitivity of Mg-clays to pCO2 and pH, their high reactive surface area, and their Al-free composition can lead to their destabilization, replacement, and dissolution during early diagenesis Deocampo, 2005 Tosca, 2015 Tosca and Wright, 2015 . Fluctuations in environmental conditions probably favored distinct Mg-clay minerals in time and variable types and degrees of alterations Carramal et al., 2022 . The decrease of Mg-clays amounts in the high areas of the depositional setting and particularly in Unit 1 coincides with an increase of dolomite and magnesite amounts, which suggest more intense replacement processes. The diagenetic alterations of Mg-clays and their relationship with other minerals will be discussed below. 5.1.2. Fascicular calcite crusts Fascicular calcite crusts or shrubs from the Barra Velha and Mac abu Formations have been illustrated in several publications Herlinger 19 A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 Fig. 16. Schematic transect showing profiles of bulk mineralogy, 13C, 18O of the wells W4 and W5. The well W5 does not have sufficient mineralogy data for correlation. et al., 2017 Farias et al., 2019 Gomes et al., 2020 Lima and De Ros, 2019 Wright and Barnett, 2020 and are interpreted by these authors as products of abiotic precipitation. According to Herlinger et al. 2017 , the fascicular calcite aggregates are syngenetic precipitates resulting from encrustation and replacement of other sediments, mainly steven site. Wright and Barnett 2015 , Farias et al. 2019 , and Lima and De Ros 2019 , based on petrographic characteristics, rather indicate a rapid vertical growth of crystals, directly at the sediment-water interface or right below it, from highly carbonate-saturated solutions. As the main constituent of the in-situ facies, the fascicular calcite crusts form mainly in transitional and higher areas of the depositional profile. In higher sites, these carbonates are abundant, mostly devoid of Mg-clays, and grew on top of each other. They may have formed directly at the water-sediment interface as syngenetic precipitates Lima and De Ros, 2019 . In contrast, in lower areas of the studied depositional profile, fascicular calcite crusts are mostly observed as incipient forms, being commonly associated with spherulites and interstitial Mg-clays. In this case, the frequent engulfment of Mg-clays in the calcite aggregates and their displacive crystal growth indicate that part of the shrubs precipi tated as a result of an early diagenetic process Carramal et al., 2022 , replacing and deforming the Mg-clays Lima and De Ros, 2019 Farias et al., 2019 . The preferential location of these crusts in shallow environments and the dominantly high 13C and 18O isotopic values, observed for these carbonates in Units 2 and 1, suggest precipitation under the influence of evaporative concentrations Wright and Barnett, 2015 Sabato-Ceraldi and Green, 2016 Barnett et al., 2018 Farias et al., 2019 . For Saller et al. 2016 , the morphology of these calcite crusts is dependent on depositional energy, degree of supersaturation, and substrate. The development of incipient forms in deeper and less energetic environ ments is in line with the previous observations of Lima and De Ros 2019 or Basso et al. 2020 , who also described hybrid forms 20 A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 between spherulites and fascicular crusts. The interlayering between fascicular calcite crusts and intraclastic grainstones point to rapid changes in hydrodynamic conditions. In the same way, the centimetric alternation of fascicular calcite, spherulites, and Mg-clays observed in this study, seems to reflect local and rapid changes in the lake chemistry and hydrodynamism Gomes et al., 2020 Lima and De Ros, 2019 Mercedes-Marti n et al., 2019 . An alternative hypothesis based on sedimentological observations suggests that shrubby carbonate formation might arise from the com bination of changes in the hydrodynamic conditions and microbial in fluence either in natural hot-spring deposits Erthal et al., 2017 but also in anthropogenic hyperalkaline, saline environments Bastianini et al., 2019 . Experimental data suggest that the incipient formation of verti cally stacking spherulitic calcite resembling pre-salt fascicular calcite habits requires both the intervention of highly supersaturated waters and the presence of microbial-derived polymers Mercedes-Marti n et al., 2021a, b . It was not possible to decipher such microbial influence in our study. At field scale, fascicular calcite crusts are observed in the three successive units, in quite similar proportions Table 2 , with a slight increase in Unit 1. They also gradually expand away from the structural high, from base to top of the succession Fig. 4 . This observation can be compared with the aggrading and subsequent prograding geometries with a gradual flattening outward geometry of clinoforms observed on seismic by Minzoni et al. 2021 . They interpreted these features as a basinal shallowing-upward, with the filling of accommodation and the development of laterally extended, shallow high-energy settings. The moderate to high 18O values observed for fascicular calcite crusts in Units 2 and 1 are also suggestive of a progressive increase of the evap oritic conditions toward the end of the BVF deposition, which would lead to highly carbonate-saturated lake-waters. The rather constant 13C values compared to the larger range of 18O values Fig. 16 indicates long water residence times in the paleolake, equilibrium between at mospheric and lake water CO2, and evaporative conditions Pietzsch et al., 2020 . conditions Pietzsch et al., 2020 . The exact timing of spherulite formation relative to Mg-clay pre cipitation is also debated. Wright and Barnett 2015, 2020 proposed the precipitation and deposition of an initial Mg-silicate gel, its subsequent crystallization to different types of Mg-clay, in which the spherulites would grow and be potentially re-worked. Based on the strong parallel orientation of the laminated deposits, on their common association with siliciclastic particles and mud, and on the deformation of the Mg-clay laminae by the very early precipitation of the spherulites, we inter preted that they precipitated within an already formed Mg-clay fabric, following the work of Carramal et al. 2022 . It must be noted that, based on experimental observations, Mercedes-Marti n et al. 2016 suggested that silicate gels might not be required to encourage the for mation of polycrystalline calcite grains which otherwise can be the product of interference with organic acids. The amounts of calcite spherulites, shrubs, and Mg-clays in the different facies are apparently controlled by the intensity of the Mg-clay alteration processes in the higher and lower areas, related to different hydrodynamic conditions and intensive dissolution processes. Indeed, we observe that the transitional and higher areas of the depositional profile show low or absence of Mg-clays content and a higher proportion of spherulites. In this setting, the dissolution of Mg-clays could be related to lake level fluctuations, with rare potential subaerial exposure suggested by the flat-pebble breccia and teepee structures observed in laminites facies, or to the dilution of lacustrine waters by meteoric influx Lima and De Ros, 2019 Carramal et al., 2022 . Mg-clays dissolution is also important in the wells located on the flank and in well W6, locations characterized by the presence of faults Fig. 12 . Such areas would be more prone to CO2 input by magmatic and hydrothermal activity Herlinger et al., 2017 Lima and De Ros, 2019 and to early diagenetic dissolution. Conversely, greater accumulation and preservation of Mg-clays is observed in the northwest area, characterized by a lower structural position and by rare faults. Dissolution is a critical process of porosity generation in BVF deposits Tosca and Wright, 2015 , especially in the Mg-claystones with spher ulites, that originally presented a poor reservoir quality. In addition, the Mg-clay dissolution could play a key role in later diagenesis Tosca and Wright, 2015 Carramal et al., 2022 . The release into the system of Mg2 , SiO2 and minor Na would favor the precipitation of dolomite, silica, and Na-silicates Tosca and Wright, 2015 . This is supported by the diagenetic features observed in the study area. The distribution of dissolution and dolomite in the Mg-claystones share a similar increasing trend Table 5 towards transitional and higher areas. In particular, medium-crystalline mosaic dolomite is the most common dolomite fabric on the structural high, with a maximum observed in Unit 1. 5.2. Early diagenetic phases Syngenetic and eogenetic processes occur in close association in the pre-salt deposits. The initial composition, constituted mainly by Mgclays and fascicular calcite, is one of the factors influencing the diage netic modifications and resulting products Herlinger et al., 2017 . 5.2.1. Spherulites and Mg-clay preservation Spherulites are very common and abundant in the BVF, throughout the entire basin. The formation of calcite spherulites is a subject of discussion, having been interpreted as a result of 1 biotic primary precipitation associated with microbial processes Chafetz et al., 2018 Kirkham and Tucker, 2018 , and 2 eodiagenetic products, replacing and or displacing the laminated Mg-clays Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2016 Herlinger et al., 2017 Lima and De Ros, 2019 Carramal et al., 2022 . In our study, spherulites appear in three sub-facies Mg-claystones with low and with high proportions of spherulites and grainstones. These facies are characterized at certain locations of the depositional profile by moderate to intense dissolution of the clay matrix Fig. 9F , generating porosity. This is in line with the observations of Wright and Barnett 2020 , who recognized three different associations of spheru lites in the BVF 1 in association with Mg-clays 2 with fenestral porosity, lacking Mg-clay and 3 as re-worked deposits. Moreover, the spherulites observed in our study frequently display inclusions of Mg-clay, with a displacive growth that locally deformed the Mg-clay laminations. These observations support a secondary diagenetic origin for the spherulites rather than primary syngenetic precipitation. The similar 13C and 18O range of values than for fascicular calcite also indicate long water residence times in the paleolake and evaporative 5.2.2. Dolomite After the calcite spherulites and shrubs, dolomite is an important diagenetic mineral phase identified in the BVF sediments, occurring more as a replacement phase than as a pore-filling cement. The different fabrics observed can be associated with distinct timings. The lamellar dolomites magnesites, which mimic shapes of Mg-clays laminations plates are one of the specificities of the pre-salt sag deposits Wright and Barnett, 2020 Carramal et al., 2022 . These lamellar ag gregates were associated with highly evaporative conditions, as attested by the presence of magnesite, which requires highly concentrated waters Farias et al., 2019 . Carramal et al. 2022 suggested that they initially formed filling shrinkage pores generated by Mg-clays dehydration or by its replacement by kerolite. The well-expressed pseudomorphosis of the Mg-clay laminae suggests very early diagenesis prior to any significant compaction that would have closed the shrinkage porosity. Another recurrent form of dolomite is the microcrystalline dolomite, occurring mainly in the transition zones and Unit 1, largely associated with laminites facies. It is often observed as a replacement of Mg-clays and commonly occurs in association with crypto-to fine crystalline calcite. Dolomite samples of the laminites facies show lower ranges of 21 A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 Table 5 Statistical summary of the average and maximum amounts of Mg-clay, dolomite, and secondary dissolution porosity in the Mg-claystones with spherulites. Regions Lower Constituents Diagenetic phase Mg-clay Dolomite Syngenetic Replacing constituents Filling porosity Secondary dissolution porosity Transitional Higher Flank section C Average Maximum Average Maximum Average Maximum Average Maximum 11.5 17.5 55.0 70.0 5.0 34.0 30.0 88.0 1.2 27.0 13.0 80.0 2.4 31.0 42.0 83.0 1.5 24.0 3.7 19.5 6.5 24.0 7.6 22.0 18O and 13C values, compared to calcites sampled in the same facies and to dolomites sampled in other facies. This may point to episodic changing environmental conditions and more diluted waters, leading to Mg-clays replacement. In our case study, the microcrystalline dolomite is precisely observed in the uppermost part of the BVF, and associated with crenulated laminites, generally interpreted as microbial in origin Sartorato, 2018 Artaga o, 2018 . Given these two points, the role of biological processes in its formation cannot be totally discarded. The rhombohedral dolomite is predominantly found associated with fascicular calcite crusts and spherulites, often floating in the intersti tial space among the calcite shrubs and spherulites. This dolomite fabric concentrates mainly in lower areas and Unit 2, reflecting their close association with Mg-clays. In their depositional model for the BVF, Farias et al. 2019 proposed an alternative model for the formation of dolomite rhombs. According to them, the beginning of the evaporation process would result in precipitation of fascicular calcite at the sediment-water interface and precipitation of rhombohedral dolomites at the brine-air interface, which would then accumulate at the bottom of the saline lake. With progressive evaporation of the CaCO3-rich waters increasing the Mg Ca ratio into the systems, the dolomitization of the Mg-clay matrix occurred Farias et al., 2019 . This would result in the deposition of levels of fascicular calcite crusts alternated with levels of dolomite rhombs, and not in the observed distribution of rhombs floating in the interstitial spaces among shrubs. Moreover, this would not explain the dolomite distribution associated with the spherulites. Finally, in these facies, the isotopic values observed for dolomite show a similar range of 18O values but lower 13C values compared to calcite of the same facies, which is not the expected behavior for a continuous increasing evaporation of the lake waters. Given these observations, the rhombohedral dolomite likely results from the partial replacement of Mg-clays before their subsequent dissolution Herlinger et al., 2017 . laminites associated with the presence of replacive microcrystalline dolomite or calcite and their respective isotopic signatures see above also suggest the alternation of freshening-evaporation lake conditions Wright, 2022 or reduced infiltration to sub-bottom aquifers Merce des-Marti n et al., 2019 . Alternatively, a hypothesis of precipitation as a syngenetic phase is addressed in Sartorato et al. 2020 , with the cryp tocrystalline silica resulting from organo-mineralization processes. However, in the study area, this silica phase is rarely found. 5.3. Mesogenetic phases and hydrothermal processes In our case study, the higher areas and southeast flank show a sig nificant dolomitization process, evidenced by the increase of pervasive mosaic dolomite, especially within in-situ facies Mg-claystones with spherulites, laminites, and fascicular calcite crusts . The higher occur rence of dolomite associated with a decrease in the amount of Mg-clay may again suggest the replacement of Mg-clay by dolomite. However, petrographic observations i.e., Fig. 7E H showed that the granular mosaic dolomite can also replace pervasively fascicular calcites and spherulites, grow as a pore-filling cement in the primary porosity mostly associated with grainstones or also co-occur with macro crystalline quartz as fracture-infill. This indicates a late eogenetic to mesogenetic timing. Total replacement of the original carbonate fabrics is frequently observed. Moreover, intervals with macrocrystalline quartz and coarse blocky calcite cement, are recurrent. The depositional texture exerted a strong control on the diagenetic modifications Herlinger et al., 2017 . Grainstones and fascicular calcite crusts exhibit heterogeneous cemen tation, and more dissolution features, as the initial porous systems of these sediments may have facilitated fluid circulation. As faults are more common in those areas, the structural pattern apparently acted as a major controlling factor. The greater intensity of such diagenetic alter ations, as well as the presence of saddle dolomite, could be related to the circulation of hydrothermal fluids along those fractured zones. However, extensive hydrothermal processes, like those reported in other portions of the Santos and Campos Basin Vieira de Luca et al., 2017 Lima et al., 2020 , were not found in the study area. Silicification has no peculiar spatial distribution and does not exhibit features indic ative of hydrothermal events, as described in the coeval succession of the Pa o de Ac ucar area of Campos Basin Vieira de Luca et al., 2017 , or the Parque das Baleias area of Northern Campos Basin Lima et al., 2020 . Isotopic ratios do not point either to an important hydrothermalism diagenetic overprint, given the relatively high and positive values. Mineral phases such as macrocrystalline calcite, saddle dolomite, barite, celestine and fluorite, characteristic of hydrothermal alteration of the pre-salt formation in the Campos Basin Lima and De Ros, 2019 , have been only observed in a very low proportion in the study area. The QEMSCAM and XRD analyses also show that these minerals occur only as minor or even trace amounts. Among the mentioned minerals, saddle dolomite is the most prominent, and although it is not by itself indicative of hydrothermal processes, it is often associated with wells located in fault zones, suggesting hydrothermal influence Herlinger et al., 2017 . Hydrothermal activity contributed only locally to the alteration of the pre-salt carbonates and to the precipitation of specific mineral 5.2.3. Silica Early diagenetic silica occurs mainly as nodules Fig. 3G , layers, and pervasive microcrystalline quartz. Despite the limited amounts of silica observed in the petrographic descriptions, it is more common in Unit 1, where it is a relevant component in XRD analyses Fig. 16 . The origins and timing of silica in the BVF are debated. Various forms of silica have been identified in the pre-salt formations of the conjugate South Atlantic margins, in Brazil offshore Santos and Campos Basins and Angola Kwanza and Namibe Basins . In the Kwanza Basin, the original carbonate deposits suffered important diagenesis where silica metasomatism plays a key role with 1 early replacement and cemen tation by silica at relatively low temperature 100 C 2 a second silica generation linked to high-temperature hydrothermal processes Tritlla et al., 2018 Teboul et al., 2019 . In the Campos Basin Pa o de Ac u car , pervasive silicification of the original carbonates attributed to a late hydrothermalism phase, that generated corrosion, porosity forma tion, and silica replacement and precipitation Vieira de Luca et al., 2017 . Finally, eogenetic silica precipitation has been interpreted as Mg-clays replacement Lima and De Ros, 2019 Wright and Barnett, 2020 , linked to freshening lake periods when relatively lower alkalinity values would favor its precipitation Wright and Barnett, 2020 . The higher proportions of silica in Unit 1 and especially within 22 A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 assemblages. this research. We are grateful for the analytical work provided by Pet robras Research Center CENPES , and we also thank Camila Wense Ramnani and Daniel M. Oliveira for their valuable contributions. The authors wish also to thank reviewers L. F. De Ros, R. Mercedes-Marti n, and R. Swennen, as well as the Editor Dr. Miroslaw Slowakiewicz for their constructive suggestions that greatly improve the quality of the manuscript. 6. Conclusions The integrated analysis of sedimentary facies, geochemistry data, and diagenetic features of the BVF in a key area of the Santos Basin highlighted the roles of depositional setting and primary constituents on the diagenetic processes. The quantitative characterization of diagenetic products allowed to recognize spatial and stratigraphic trends of syngenetic and diagenetic phases, indicating the Mg-clays as an initial substrate. The pattern of Mg-clays preservation indicates that the structural setting was a strong determinant of the diagenetic changes, with stronger diagenetic alterations along structural highs and fault zones. The precipitation of fascicular calcite was much more developed in higher areas, and their alternation with Mg-clay precipitates suggests local fluctuations of evaporative conditions of the basin. The gradual lateral expansion of fascicular calcite away from the structural high during Unit 1 is associated with a large-scale basinal shallowing upward trend. The data from the present study suggest that evaporative conditions prevailed in the Aptian pre-salt succession with some fluctuations in environmental conditions favoring different Mg-clay minerals in time, distinct isotopic signatures, and variable types and degrees of diagenetic alterations. In Unit 3 base , low isotopic ratios, higher detrital siliciclastic volcanoclastic grains, and dominance of Mgsmectite suggest relatively dilute waters, with high detrital input and low to moderate Si Mg ratios. In Unit 2, the high isotopic values, the progressive increase of mixed layer kerolite Mg-smectite and kerolite, the decrease of detrital grains apart from the structural high are indicators of more evaporative conditions and lesser input of water. Finally, in Unit 1 top , lower 18O values but high 13C, the dominance of kerolite, the occurrence of silica and dolomitic replacement phases may point to evaporative conditions but with frequent fluctuations and freshening of the water, explaining the stronger diagenetic imprint. Dolomite is one of the most relevant diagenetic phases in the BVF, largely associated with Mg-clays replacement, developing in several fabrics. Lamellar dolomite magnesite aggregates, microcrystalline and rhombohedral dolomite are early diagenetic phases, strongly dependent on the environmental conditions and variations of the lake water composition. Given its pervasive aspect and its cooccurrence with macrocrystalline quartz as fracture-infill, mosaic dolomite is a mesogenetic product. Its preferential occurrence in higher structural positions and flank regions may suggest a structural control. The dissolution features indicate an important process of secondary porosity generation, mainly associated with diagenetic Mg-clays destabilization. The presence of macrocrystalline calcite, saddle dolomite, barite, celestine and fluorite are typical products of hydrothermal alter ation. Their distribution in the higher structural positions and in the southeast flank may be related to minor hydrothermal fluids circu lation, also having an impact on the alteration of carbonate phases. Appendix A. Supplementary data Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https doi. org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2022.105708. References Almeida, F.F.M., Hasui, Y., Brito Neves, B.B., Fuck, R.A., 1981. Brazilian structural provinces an introduction. Earth Sci. Rev. 17 1 2 , 1 29. Alves, T.M., Fetter, M., Lima, C., Cartwright, J.A., Cosgrove, J., Gang, A., Queiroz, C.L., Strugale, M., 2017. An incomplete correlation between pre-salt topography, top reservoir erosion, and salt deformation in deep-water Santos Basin SE Brazil . Mar. Petrol. Geol. 79, p300 320. Artaga o, V.M., 2018. Ana lise estratigra fica de alta resoluc a o aplicada aos depo sitos da Formac a o Barra Velha, Bacia de Santos identificac a o, correlac a o e mecanismos de contro le de ciclos sedimentares. Master thesis. UERJ, Brasil in Portuguese . Asmus, H., Ponte, F., 1973. The Brazilian marginal basins. In The South Atlantic. Springer, New York, pp. 87 133. Barnett, A.J., Obermaier, M., Amthor, J., Juk, K., Camara, R., Sharafodin, M., Bolton, M., 2018. Origin and significance of thick carbonate grainstone packages in non-marine successions a case study from the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin. In AAPG Search and Discovery Article 11116, Adapted from Poster Presentation. AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition, Salt Lake City, Utah, pp. 20 23. Basso, M., Belila, A.M.P., Chinelatto, G.F., Souza, J.P.P., Vidal, A.C., 2020. Sedimentology and petrophysical analysis of pre-salt lacustrine carbonate reservoir from the Santos Basin, southeast Brazil. Int. J. Earth Sci. 110, 2573 2595. Bastianini, L., Rogerson, M., Mercedes-Marti n, R., Prior, T.J., Cesar, E.A., Mayes, W.M., 2019. What causes carbonates to form shrubby morphologies An anthropocene limestone case study. Front. Earth Sci. 7 September , 1 19. Burne, R.V., Moore, L.S., Christy, A.G., Troitzsch, U., King, P.L., Carnerup, A.M., Hamilton, P.J., 2014. Stevensite in the modern thrombolites of Lake Clifton, Western Australia a missing link in microbialite mineralisation Geology 42, 575 578. Cainelli, C., Mohriak, W.U., 1999. Some remarks on the evolution of sedimentary basins along the Eastern Brazilian continental margin. Episodes 22, 206 216. Carlotto, M.A., Silva, R.C.B., Yamato, A.A., Trindade, W.L., Moreira, J.L.P., Fernandes, R. A.R., Ribeiro, O.J.S., 2017. Libra a newborn giant in the Brazilian pre-salt province. In Merrill, R.K., Sternbach, C.A. Eds. , Giant Fields of the Decade 2000 2010. AAPG Memoir 113, Houston, Texas, pp. 165 176. Carminatti, M., Wolff, B., Gamboa, L., 2008. New exploratory frontiers in Brazil. In 19th World Petroleum Congress, vol. 19. Congress Paper, Madrid. Carminatti, M., Dias, J.L., Wolff, B., 2009. From turbidites to carbonates breaking paradigms in deep waters Houston, Texas. In Offshore Technology Conference, 4 7 May, OTC 20124. Carramal, N.G., Oliveira, D.N., Cacela, A.S.M., Cuglieri, M.A.A., Natasha, P., Rocha, N.P., Viana, S.M., Toledo, S.L.V., Pedrinha, S., De Ros, L.F., 2022. Paleoenvironmental insights from the deposition and diagenesis of aptian pre-salt magnesium silicates from lula field, Santos Basin, Brazil. J. Sediment. Res. 92, 12 31. Chaboureau, A.C., Guillocheau, F., Robin, C., Rohais, S., Moulin, M., Aslanian, D., 2012. Palaeogeographic evolution of the central segment of the South Atlantic during Early Cretaceous times palaeotopographic and geodynamic implications. Tectonophysics 14, 6489. Chafetz, H.S., Barth, J., Cook, M., Guo, X., Zhou, J., 2018. Origins of carbonate spherulites implications for Brazilian Aptian Pre-Salt reservoir. Sediment. Geol. 365, 21 33. Chang, H.K., Kowsmann, R.O., Figueiredo, A.M.F., Bender, A., 1992. Tectonics and stratigraphy of the East Brazil Rift system an overview. Tectonophysics 213 1 , 97 138. Conceic a o, J.C., Zalan, P.V., Wolff, S., 1988. Mecanismo, evoluc a o e cronologia do rift Sul-Atlantico. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 2, 255 265. Deocampo, D.M., 2005. Evaporative evolution of surface waters and the role of aqueous CO2 in magnesium silicate precipitation lake Eyasi and Ngorongoro crater, northern Tanzania. S. Afr. J. Geol. 108, 493 504. Deocampo, D.M., 2015. Authigenic Clay Minerals in Lacustrine Mudstones, vol. 515. Geological Society of America Special Paper, pp. 49 64. Deschamps, R., Rohais, S., Hamon, Y., Gasparrini, M., 2020. Dynamic of a lacustrine sedimentary system during late rifting at the cretaceous palaeocene transition example of the Yacoraite formation, Salta basin, Argentina. The depositional record 6, 490 523. Dias, J., Oliveira, J., Vieira, J., 1988. Sedimentological and stratigraphyc analysis of the Lagoa Feia Formation, rift phase of Campos basin, offshore Brazil. Rev. Bras. Geociencias 18, 252 260. Dias, J.L., 2005. Tecto nica, estratigrafia e sedimentac a o no Andar Aptiano da margem leste brasileira. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 13, 7 25. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Acknowledgments The results and interpretations of this paper are part of the Ph.D. funded by Petroleo Brasileiro S.A. Petrobras. The authors greatly acknowledge Petrobras for the data release and permission to publish 23 A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 Dickson, J.A.D., 1965. A modified staining technique for carbonates in thin section. Nature 205, 587. Erthal, M.M., Capezzuoli, E., Mancini, A., Claes, H., Soete, J., Swennen, R., 2017. Shrub morpho-types as indicator for the water flow energy Tivoli travertine case Central Italy . Sediment. Geol. 347, 79 99. Farias, F., Szatmari, P., Bahniuk, A., Franc a, A.B., 2019. Evaporitic carbonates in the presalt of Santos Basin genesis and tectonic implications. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 105, 251 272. Gala n, E., Pozo, M., 2011. Palygorskite and sepiolite deposits in continental environments. Description, genetic patterns and sedimentary settings. In Developments in Clay Science, vol. 3. Elsevier, pp. 125 173. Gomes, P.O., Kilsdonk, B., Minken, J., Grow, T., Barragan, R., 2009. The Outer High of the Santos Basin, southern Sa o Paulo Plateau, Brazil pre-salt exploration outbreak, paleogeographic setting, and evolution of the syn-rift structures. In AAPG Search and Discovery Article 10193. Gomes, J.P., Bunevich, R.B., Tedeschi, L.R., Tucker, M.E., Whitaker, F.F., 2020. Facies classification and patterns of lacustrine carbonate deposition of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazilian pre-salt. Mar. Petrol. Geol. ume 113. Heilbron, M.L., Pedrosa-Soares, A.C., Campos Neto, M.C., Silva, L.C., Trouw, R.A.J., 2004. Provi ncia Mantiqueira. In Mantesso-Neto, V.M., Bartorelli, A., Carneiro, C.D. R., Neves, Brito, B, B., orgs Eds. , Geologia Do Continente Sul-Americano. Sa o Paulo, Editora Beca, pp. 203 234. Herlinger, R.J., Zambonato, E.E., De Ros, L.F., 2017. Influence of diagenesis on the quality of lower cretaceous pre-salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs from northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. J. Sediment. Res. 87, 1285 1313. Jones, B.F., Galan, E., 1988. Sepiolite and palygorskite. In Bailey, S.W. Ed. , Hydrous Phyllosilicates, Reviews in Mineralogy, 19. Mineralogical Society of America, Washington, DC, pp. 631 674. Karner, G.D., Driscoll, N.W., Barker, D.H.N., 2003. Synrift subsidence across the West African continental margin the role of lower plate ductile extension. In Arthur, T.J., MacGregor, D.S., Cameron, N.R. Eds. , Petroleum Geology of Africa New Themes and Developing Technologies, vol. 207. Geol. Soc. Spec. Publ, pp. 105 125. Karner, G.D., Gamboa, L.a.P., 2007. Timing and origin of the South Atlantic pre-salt sag basins and their capping evaporites. Geol. Soc. Lond. Spec. Publ. 285 1 , 15 35. Kirkham, A., Tucker, M.E., 2018. Thrombolites, spherulites and fibrous crusts Holkerian, Purbeckian, Aptian context, fabrics and origins. Sediment. Geol. 374, 69 84. Lentini, M.R., Fraser, S.I., Sumner, H.S., Davies, R.J., 2010. Geodynamics of the central South Atlantic conjugate margins implications for hydrocarbon potential. Petrol. Geosci. 16. Liechoscki de Paula Faria, D., Tadeu dos Reis, A., Gomes de Souza Jr., O., 2017. Threedimensional stratigraphic-sedimentological forward modelling of an Aptian carbonate reservoir deposited during the sag stage in the Santos basin, Brazil. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 88, 676 695. Lima, B.E., De Ros, L.F., 2019. Deposition, diagenetic and hydrothermal processes in the Aptian Pre-Salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs of the northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Sediment. Geol. 383, 55 81. Lima, B.E., Tedeschi, L.R., Pestilho, A.L.S., Santos, R.V., Vasquez, J.C., Guzzo, J.V.P., De Ros, L.F., 2020. Deep-burial hydrothermal alteration of the Pre-Salt carbonate reservoirs from northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil evidence from petrography, fluid inclusions, Sr, C and O isotopes. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 113. Magalhaes, A.J.C., Raja Gabaglia, G.P., Fragoso, D.G.C., Bento Freire, E., Lykawka, R., Arregui, C.D., Silveira, M.M.L., Carpio, K.M.T., De Gasperi, A., Pedrinha, S., Artagao, V.M., Terra, G.J.S., Bunevich, R.B., Roemers-Oliveira, E., Gomes, J.P., Hernandez, J.I., Hernandez, R.M., Bruhn, C.H.L., 2020. High-resolution sequence stratigraphy applied to reservoir zonation and characterisation, and its impact on production performance shallow marine, fluvial downstream, and lacustrine carbonate settings. Earth Sci. Rev. 210. Mercedes-Marti n, R., Ayora, C., Tritlla, J., Sa nchez-Roma n, M., 2019. The hydrochemical evolution of alkaline volcanic lakes a model to understand the South Atlantic Presalt mineral assemblages. Earth Sci. Rev. 198, 102938. Mercedes-Marti n, R., Brasier, A.T., Rogerson, M.R., Reijmer, J.J.G., Vonhof, H.B., Pedley, H.M., 2017. A depositional model for spherulitic carbonates associated with alkaline, volcanic lakes. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 86, 168 191. Mercedes-Marti n, R., Rao, A., Rogerson, M., Sa nchez-Roma n, M., 2021a. Effects of Salinity, Organic Acids and Alkalinity in the Growth of Calcite Spherulites Implications for Evaporitic Lacustrine Sedimentation. The Depositional Record, pp. 1 22. December 2020. Mercedes-Marti n, R., Rogerson, M.R., Brasier, A.T., Vonhof, H.B., Prior, T.J., Fellows, S. M., Reijmer, J.J.G., Billing, I., Pedley, H.M., 2016. Growing spherulitic calcite grains in saline, hyperalkaline lakes experimental evaluation of the effects of Mg-clays and organic acids. Sediment. Geol. 335, 93 102. Mercedes-Marti n, R., Rogerson, M., Prior, T.J., Brasier, A.T., Reijmer, J.J.G., Billing, I., Pedley, M., 2021b. Towards a morphology diagram for terrestrial carbonates evaluating the impact of carbonate supersaturation and alginic acid in calcite precipitate morphology. Geochem. Cosmochim. Acta 306, 340 361. Milani, E.J., Rangel, H.D., Bueno, G.V., Stica, J.M., Winter, W.R., Caixeta, J.M., Neto, O. C.P., 2007. Bacias sedimentares brasileiras cartas estratigra ficas Introduc a o. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 15 2 , 183 198. Minzoni, M., Cantelli, A., Thorton, J., Wignall, B., 2021. Seismic-Scale Geometries and Sequence-Stratigraphic Architecture of Early Cretaceous Syn-Post Rift Carbonate Systems, Presalt Section, Brazil, vol. 509. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 105 126. Mio, E.D., 2005. Modelagem crustal da Bacia de Santos pela integrac ao de metodos geofi sicos. Instituto de Geocie ncias da Universidade Estadual Paulista, Rio Claro, Sa o Paulo, p. 94. Thesis Master . Morad, S., Al-Aasm, I.S., Nader, F.H., Ceriani, A., Gasparrini, M., Mansurbeg, H., 2012. Impact of diagenesis on the spatial and temporal distribution of reservoir quality in the Jurassic Arab D and C Members, offshore Abu Dhabi oilfield, United Arab Emirates. GeoArabia 17, 17 56. Moreira, J.L.P., Madeira, C.V., Gil, J.A., Machado, M.A.P., 2007. Bacia de Santos. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 15 2 , 531 549. Moulin, M., Aslanian, D., Unternehr, P., 2010. A new starting point for the history of the Equatorial and South Atlantic. Earth Sci. Rev. 98, 1 37. Muniz, M.C., Bosence, D.W.J., 2015. Pre-salt microbialites from the Campos Basin offshore Brazil image log facies, facies model and cyclicity in lacustrine carbonates. In Bosence, D.W.J., Gibbons, K.A., Le Heron, D.P., Morgan, W.A., Pritchard, T., Vining, B.A. Eds. , Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production, vol. 418. Geological Society of London, Special Publication, pp. 221 242. Netto, P.R.A., Pozo, M., da Silva, M.D., Mexias, A.S., Gomes, M.E.B., Borghi, L., RiosNetto, A.M., 2022. Authigenic Mg-clay assemblages in the Barra Velha Formation upper cretaceous from Santos Basin Brazil the role of syngenetic and diagenetic process. Appl. Clay Sci. 216. Pace, A., Bourillot, R., Bouton, A., Vennin, E., Galaup, S., Bundeleva, I., Patrier, P., Dupraz, C., Thomazo, C., Sansjofre, P., Yokoyama, Y., Franceschi, M., Anguy, Y., Pigot, L., Virgone, A., Visscher, P.T., 2016. Microbial and diagenetic steps leading to the mineralisation of Great Salt Lake microbialites. Sci. Rep. 6, 31495. Papaterra, G.E.Z., 2010. Pre -sal Conceituac a o Geolo gica sobre uma Nova Fronteira Explorato ria no Brasil. Master thesis. UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro. Brasil in Portuguese . Pereira, M.J., Feijo , F.J., 1994. Bacia de Santos. Estratigrafia das Bacias Sedimentares do Brasil. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 8, 219 234. Perri, E., Tucker, M.E., S owakiewicz, M., Whitaker, F., Bowen, L., Perrotta, I.D., 2018. Carbonate and silicate biomineralization in a hypersaline microbial mat Mesaieed sabkha, Qatar roles of bacteria, extracellular polymeric substances and viruses. Sedimentology 65, 1213 1245. Pietzsch, R., Oliveira, D.M., Tedeschi, L.R., Neto, J.V.Q., Figueiredo, M.F., Vazquez, J.C., de Souza, R.S., 2018. Palaeohydrology of the lower cretaceous pre-salt lacustrine system, from rift to post-rift phase, Santos Basin, Brazil. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 507, 60 80. Pietzsch, R., Tedeschi, L.R., Oliveira, D.M., Anjos, C.W.D., Vazqueza, J.C., Figueiredo, M. F., 2020. Environmental conditions of deposition of the Lower Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin Brazil , based on stable carbon and oxygen isotopes a continental record of pCO2 during the onset of the Oceanic Anoxic Event 1a OAE 1a interval Chem. Geol. 535. Pinto, V.H.G., Manatschal, G., Karpoff, A.M., Ulrich, M., Viana, A.R., 2017. Seawater storage and element transfer associated with mantle serpentinization in magma-poor rifted margins a quantitative approach. Earth Planet Sci. Lett. 459, 227 237. Popoff, M., 1988. Du Gondwana a l Atlantique sud les connections du fosse de la Be noue avec les bassins du Nord-Est bresilien jusqu a l ouverture du golfe de Guine e au Cre tace infe rieur. J. Afr. Earth Sci. Spec. Publ. 7 2 , 409 431. Pozo, M., Calvo, J.P., 2018. An overview of authigenic magnesian clays. Minerals 8 520 , 1 22. Rabinowitz, P.D., Labrecque, J., 1979. The mesozoic South Atlantic ocean and evolution of its continental margins. J. Geophys. Res. 84, 5973 6002. Rezende, M.F., Pope, M.C., 2015. Importance of depositional texture in pore characterization of subsalt microbialite carbonates, offshore Brazil. Geol. Soc. Lond. Spec. Publ. 418 1 , 193 207. https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.2. Rodriguez-Carvajal, J., Roisnel, T., 1998. FullProf.98 and WinPLOTR New Windows 95 NT Applications for Diffraction. Commission for Power Diffraction, International Union for Crystallography. Newsletter N 20 May-August . Sabato-Ceraldi, T., Green, D., 2016. Evolution of the South Atlantic Lacustrine deposits in response to Early Cretaceous rifting, subsidence and lake hydrology. In Sabato Ceraldi, T., Hodgkinson, R.A., Backe, G. Eds. , Petroleum Geoscience of the West African Margin. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, p. 438. Saller, A., Rushton, S., Buambua, L., Inman, K., McNeil, R., Dickson, J.T., 2016. Presalt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola. AAPG Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull. 100 7 , 1135 1164. Sartorato, A.C.L., 2018. Caracterizac a o faciolo gica, estratigra fica e diagene tica dos reservato rios carbona ticos da Formac a o Barra Velha, Bacia de Santos. Master thesis. UERJ, Brazil in portuguese . Sartorato, A.C.N., Tonietto, S.N., Pereira, E., 2020. Silicification and dissolution features in the brazilian Pre-salt Barra Velha formation impacts in the reservoir quality and insights for 3D geological modeling. In Rio Oil Gas Expo and Conference. Szatmari, P., Milani, E.J., 2016. Tectonic control of the oil-rich large igneous carbonatesalt province of the South Atlantic rift. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 77, 567 596. Talbot, M.R., 1990. A review of the palaeohydrological interpretation of carbon and oxygen isotopic ratios in primary lacustrine carbonates. Chem. Geol. Isot. Geosci. 80 4 , 261 279 Amsterdam . Tanaka, A.P., Faria, D.L.P., Gomes, J.P.B., Souza Jr., O.G., 2018. Geological characterisation and modeling of an Aptian carbonate reservoir in the Santos basin, Brazil. In AAPG 2018 AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition. Salt Lake City, Utah, May 20 23. Taylor, J.M., 1950. Pore space reduction in sandstone. Bull. Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. 34, 701 716. Teboul, P.A., Durlet, C., Girard, J.P., Dubois, L., San Miguel, G., Virgone, A., Camoin, G., 2019. Diversity and origin of quartz cements in continental carbonates example from the Lower Cretaceous rift deposits of the South Atlantic margin. Appl. Geochem. 100, 22 41. Tedeschi, L.R., 2017. Doctor of Philosophy Thesis in Lower Cretaceous Climate Records and the Correlation between Marine and Lacustrine Settings Europe and South America . University of Oxford. 24 A.M. Almeida Carvalho et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 141 2022 105708 Fields of the Decade 2000 2010, vol. 113. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, USA, Memoir, pp. 177 194. Whitaker, F., Frazer, M.A., 2018. Process based modelling of syn depositional diagenesis. In Xiao, Y., Whitaker, F., Xu, T. Eds. , Reactive Transport Modelling Application to Subsurface Energy and Environmental Problems, first ed. Wiley, pp. 107 156. Winter, W.R., Jahnert, R.J., Franc a, A.B., 2007. Bacia de Campos. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 15, 511 529. Wright, V.P., 2012. Lacustrine carbonates in rift settings the interaction of volcanic and microbial processes on carbonate deposition. In Garland, J., Neilson, J.E., Laubach, S., Whidden, K.J. Eds. , Advances in Carbonate Exploration and Reservoir Analysis, vol. 370. Geological Society of London, Special Publications, pp. 39 47. Wright, 2022. The mantle, CO2 and the giant Aptian chemogenic lacustrine carbonate factory of the South Atlantic some carbonates are made, not born. Sedimentology 69, 47 73. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2015. An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic Early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates. In Grotzinger, J.P., James, N. Eds. , Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production, vol. 418. The Geological Society of London, Special Publication, pp. 209 219. Wright, V.P., Tosca, N.J., 2016. Geochemical model for the formation of the pre-salt reservoirs, Santos basin, Brazil implications for understanding reservoir distribution. In American Association of Petroleum Geologists Annual Convention and Exhibition Calgary, Alberta, Canada . Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2017. Critically Evaluating the Current Depositional Models for the Pre-salt Barra Velha Formation. In Offshore Brazil. AAPG Search and Discovery. Article 51439. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2020. The textural evolution and ghost matrices of the Cretaceous Barra Velha Formation carbonates from the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. Facies 66, 7. Young, R.A., 1993. Introduction to the Rietveld method. In Young, R.A. Ed. , The Rietveld Method. International Union of Crystallography. Oxford University Press, pp. 1 38. Ysaccis, R., El-Toukhy, M., Moreira, L., 2019. Maximizing the value of seismic data for a better regional understanding and exploration assessment in the Santos Basin. In Brazil Brazilian Geophysical Society, 16th International Congress, Proceedings, pp. 1 6. Terra, G.J.S., Spadini, A.R., Franca, A.B., Sombra, C.L., Zambonato, E.E., Juschaks, L.C. S., Arienti, L.M., Erthal, M.M., Blauth, M., Franco, M.P., Matsuda, N.S., Da Silva, N. G.C., Moretti Jr., P.A., D Avila, R.S.F., De Souza, R.S., Tonietto, S.N., Dos Anjos, S.M. C., Campinho, V.S., Winter, W.R., 2010. Classificac a o de rochas carbona ticas aplica vel a s bacias sedimentares brasileiras. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 18, 9 29. Terry, R.D., Chilingar, G.V., 1955. Summary of concerning some additional aids in studying sedimentary formations by M.S. Shvetsov. J. Sediment. Petrol. 25, 229 234. Torsvik, T.H., Rousse, S., Labails, C., Smethurst, M.A., 2009. A new scheme for the opening of the South Atlantic Ocean and the dissection of an Aptian salt basin. Geophys. J. Int. Tosca, N.J., Macdonald, F.A., Strauss, J.V., Johnston, D.T., Knoll, A.H., 2011. Sedimentary talc in Neoproterozoic carbonate successions. Earth Planet Sci. Lett. 306 1 , 11 22. Tosca, N., 2015. Geochemical pathways to Mg-silicate formation. In Pozo, M., Gal an, E. Eds. , Magnesian Clays Characterization, Origin and Applications. AIPEA Educational Series, Pub. No 2, Digilabs, Bari, Italy, pp. 283 329. Tosca, N.J., Masterson, A.L., 2014. Chemical controls on incipient Mg-silicate crystallisation at 258C implications for early and late diagenesis. Clay Miner. 49, 165 194. Tosca, N.J., Wright, V.P., 2015. Diagenetic Pathways Linked to Labile Mg-Clays in Lacustrine Carbonate Reservoirs a Model for the Origin of Secondary Porosity in the Cretaceous Pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, vol. 435. Geological Society, London, Special Publication, Offshore Brazil. Tosca, N.J., Wright, V.P., 2018. Diagenetic pathways linked to labile Mg-clays in lacustrine carbonate reservoirs a model for the origin of secondary porosity in the cretaceous pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, offshore Brazil. Geol. Soc. Lond. Spec. Publ. 435, 33 46. Tritlla, J., Loma, R., Esteban, M., Sanders, C., Sa nchez, V., Benito, V., Carrasco, A., Pen a, J.L., Herra, A., Gerona, M., Levresse, G., 2018. Pre-Salt Lacustrine Carbonates, Diagenetic Silicification and Hydrothermal Overprinting in Kwanza Basin Offshore Angola A Tale of Two Silicas. Conference Paper, AAPG ACE, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA. Vieira de Luca, P.H., Matias, H., Carballo, J., Sineva, D., Pimentel, G.A., Tritlla, J., Esteban, M., Loma, R., Alonso, J.L.A., Jime nez, R.P., Pontet, M., Martinez, P.B., Vega, V., 2017. Breaking barriers and paradigms in presalt exploration the Pa o de Ac u car discovery offshore Brazil . In Merrill, R.K., Sternbach, C.A. Eds. , Giant 25

[END_OF_PAPER]

Libra beyond the Mero field Geologic and stratigraphic aspects, Santos Basin Brazilian Pre-salt Province Carlos Mikael Arnemann Eliane Petersohn Rodrigo Morelatto Ju lio Cesar dos Santos Vital Brazilian National Agency of Petroleum, Natural Gas and Biofuels Cartagena April 21 st , 2022 Outline Introduction The Mero Field Mero Libra Comparison The Libra Block Geological Assessment Remaining Challenges 1 Introduction Mero and Libra location Jade Buzios Gato do Mato Mero Libra Itapu Tita Berbiga o Sururu Atapu Tre s Marias Saturno Se pia Lapa A gata Tupi BM-S-24 Sapinhoa Cruzeiro do Sul Pau-Brasil Brazil The beginning... Libra Block was awarded in 2013 in the first bidding round executed by the Brazilian government under the new production sharing agreement for the pre-salt areas. The winner consortium is formed by Petrobras Shell, Total, CNOOC, CNPC, and PPSA. The Libra Consortium is led by Petrobras with a 40 interest in partnership with Shell 20 , Total 20 , CNPC 10 , and CNOOC Limited 10 . Pre -Sal Petro leo S.A. PPSA represents the Brazilian Federal Government on production sharing agreements. The Libra block is spread over 1,548 km2 in approximately 2,100m deep water. Original Libra Block as offered in the 1st Production sharing bidding round Libra Block after Mero field declaration of commerciality Mero Field Libra Block The Mero Field was declared commercial in 2017 Current state of Libra Block Libra Block Mero Field In 2021 the Libra Consortium has relinquished the southeast area of the block It was considered as an area of low potential by the consortium 2 The Mero Field The Mero Field Mero is the third-largest Pre-salt field behind Buzios and Tupi. Mero means a large saltwater fish of the genus Epinephelus. It may reach more than 2 meters long and 400 kg in weight. 1 It was discovered by the 2-ANP-2A-RJS, appraisal well that was drilled in 2010 by Petrobras in partnership with ANP. Petrobras is the operator of the Libra Consortium with a 40 interest in partnership with Shell 20 Total 20 CNPC 10 and CNOOC 10 . PPSA manages the Libra Production Sharing Contract. Mero has reservoirs with good quality oil and high commercial value 29o API Recent stromatolites from Shark Bay, WA Source Department of Mines and Petroleum of Australia The field s total recoverable volume is estimated by Petrobras at 3.3 billion barrels of oil Offshore Energy, 2017 . 1 PETROBRAS, 2017. Libra field renamed Mero following declaration of commerciality The Mero field Northwestern Area Mero Field Central Area Libra Block Southeastern Area Buzios Field Petersohn et al. 2021 The Mero field Mero is still under the early production system The processing capacity of the FPSO is 50,000 barrels per day bpd of oil and 4 million m3 d of gas. Mero Field Libra Block Petrobras expects starting production by 2022. FPSO Guanabara, which will be the first definitive system to operate in Mero has just arrived in the field. The FPSO will be connected to the wells and subsea equipment and final tests will be carried out ahead of the first production scheduled to occur in the first half of the year. Buzios Field Petersohn et al. 2021 3-BRSA-1345-RJS 3-BRSA-1345-RJS 3-BRSA-1339A-RJS 3-BRSA-1339A-RJS 2-ANP-2A-RJS 2-ANP-2A-RJS 3-BRSA-1342A-RJS 3BRSA-1342A-RJS 3-BRSA-1322-RJS 3-BRSA-1322-RJS Sea Bottom Top of Evaporites Top Reservoir Top Camboriu Top Basement Fault Arbitrary seismic line survey R0264 PULSAR courtesy CGG Petersohn et al. 2021 3 Mero Libra Comparison Mero Field Libra Block Comparison Mero field Libra block Fluid is oil, 27 30 API GOR 360 438 m3 m3 CO2 5 46 At least 2 OWC identified Well 3-BRSA-1267A-RJS gas condensate CO2 up to 67 Fluid contact has not been identified Distinct pressure gradient from Mero Mero Field Libra Block Comparison 2-ANP-2A-RJS 3-BRSA-1305A-RJS 3-BRSA-1267A-RJS 3-BRSA-1345-RJS Upper OWC -5,705m Lower OWC -5,766m Igneous Petersohn et al. 2021 Simplified schematic representation Libra Mero Non reservoir in the middle Well did not identify a fluid contact Top reservoir base of salt vvvvvvvv vvvvvvvv OWC Gas-water contact Depth Pressure 4 The Libra Block Geological Assessment The Libra block - Geology Mero field W Libra block E N W E S Petersohn et al. 2021 The Libra block - Geology Mero field W Libra block E N W E S Petersohn et al. 2021 The Libra Block Geology Well 3-BRSA-1310-RJS Drilled in a saddle between the Mero field and the Libra high K44, K46, and K48 sequences Intercalation with igneous rocks Intense recrystallization No reservoir 3-BRSA-1310-RJS Petersohn et al. 2021 The Libra block - Geology Mero field W Libra block E N W E S Petersohn et al. 2021 The Libra block - Geology Well 3-BRSA-1267A-RJS Drilled in the Libra structural apex Resulted in gas condensate K44, K46, and K48 sequences intercalated with igneous rocks K38 sequence coquinas interspersed with mudstones Predominance of igneous rocks No fluid contacts 3-BRSA-1267A-RJS Petersohn et al. 2021 The Libra block - Geology Well 4-BRSA-1346-RJS Drilled on the flank of the Southeastern high Same stratigraphic sequences Predominance of laminites mudstones Absence of hydrocarbon shows 4-BRSA-1346-RJS Petersohn et al. 2021 The Libra block - Geology 2-ANP-2A-RJS 3-BRSA-1255-RJS 3-BRSA-1267A-RJS 3-BRSA-1350-RJS 3-BRSA-1310-RJS 3-BRSA-1342A-RJS Mero field Libra block Sea Bottom Top Reservoir Top Basement Top of Evaporites Top Seq. K38 Igneous Rocks Arbitrary seismic line survey R0264 PULSAR courtesy CGG Fault Petersohn et al. 2021 5 The Remaining Challenges The Libra block Remaining challenges Identification of fluid contacts Fluid nature gas condensate or huge gas cap with oil layer like the Jupiter prospect Low-sampled fluid volume relative to the reservoir size Condensate to Gas Ratio Total condensate in place Development challenges Heavy CO2 contamination Reservoir quality effects of thermal recrystallization Need for additional fluid sampling and appraisal wells epetersohn anp.gov.br www.gov.br anp pt-br Av. Rio Branco 65, 12th to 22nd floor - Rio de Janeiro Brazil Phone 55 21 2112-8100

[END_OF_PAPER]

Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Marine and Petroleum Geology journal homepage www.elsevier.com locate marpetgeo Compartmentalization and stratigraphic-structural trapping in pre-salt carbonate reservoirs of the Santos Basin A case study in the Iara complex Ju lio Cesar dos Santos Vital a, , Marcus Vini cius Berao Ade b, Rodrigo Morelatto c, Wagner Moreira Lupinacci a, d a Exploratory Interpretation and Reservoir Characterization Group GIECAR , Department of Geology and Geophysics, Universidade Federal Fluminense UFF , Nitero i, Rio de Janeiro, 24210346, Brazil Faculty of Geology - Department of Stratigraphy and Paleontology, Universidade Estadual do Rio de Janeiro UERJ , Rua Sa o Francisco Xavier 524, 20559900, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil c National Agency of Petroleum, Natural Gas and Biofuels ANP , Avenida Rio Branco 65, Rio de Janeiro, 20090003, Brazil d National Institute of Science and Technology of Petroleum Geophysics INCT-GP CNPQ , Nitero i, Rio de Janeiro, 24210346, Brazil b A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T Keywords Santos Basin Pre-salt Reservoir characterization Reservoir compartmentalization Carbonate reservoir heterogeneities The reservoir characterization of the Brazilian Santos Basin s pre-salt carbonates is a major challenge due to the faciological and depositional complexity, providing high lateral and vertical heterogeneities, and consequently, the formation of static dynamic intraformational seals. Regarding this context, there is a massive pre-salt accumulation known as the Iara Cluster. During the early development stage, this cluster was split into three distinct accumulations named Berbiga o, Sururu, and Atapu. This study aims to characterize the geological and hydrodynamic factors that affect the Iara Cluster reservoir compartmentalization. To achieve this objective, we applied an integrated analysis based on 3D seismic interpretation, well logs, pressure formation and fluid geochemistry analysis. The spatial distribution of the reservoir range s five main seismic patterns indicates po tential stratigraphic-structural barrier zones. The well log analysis correlated with formation pressure data enabled the identification of several irregular oil-water contacts and free water levels. Small relative variations are associated with the perched-water phenomenon, while large variations are related to compartmentalization. The formation pressure analysis shows the hydraulic compartmentalization of the reservoirs in the Berbiga o Field. Sururu and Atapu fields oil zones are possibly connected by a dynamic sealing zone or a common aquifer, which provides a pressure balance on a geological time scale, since their oil gradients are similar. Our analyzes identified stratigraphic components in reservoir trapping associated with reservoir quality lateral obliteration. Dissimilarities in the oil sample composition and properties indicate different petroleum charge histories along with the distinct CO2 contamination timing. The Berbiga o oil-associated gas formed in earlier stages of matu ration than the Sururu and Atapu samples. The results integration through a risk matrix revealed areas with a greater chance of compartmentalization and perched-water phenomenon. Our study highlights the importance of multidisciplinary analysis to comprehend complex carbonate reservoirs connectivity, and offers input to de-risk new ventures pre-salt reservoir quality. 1. Introduction Understanding the spatial variations of reservoir properties and their consequences is a critical step in reservoir modeling. Heterogeneities are mainly determined by the depositional environment in which the reservoir was formed, as well as subsequent structural and diagenetic events Ahmed, 2006 . As a result of the heterogeneity, a petroleum accumulation can be separated into individual fluid or pressure segments due to flow prevention across sealed reservoir boundaries Jolley et al., 2010 . These boundaries are divided into two categories static and dynamic seals. The first are completely sealed and capable of trapping petroleum columns over geological time. Dynamic seals are characterized by low to very low permeability flow baffles that reduce petroleum crossflow to infinitesimally slow rates, allowing fluids and pressures to equilibrate across a boundary over geological time-scales, but acting as seals over production time-scales Jolley et al., 2010 . Corresponding author. E-mail address juliocsvital gmail.com J.C.S. Vital . https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2023.106163 Received 17 November 2022 Received in revised form 31 January 2023 Accepted 2 February 2023 Available online 18 February 2023 0264-8172 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Reservoir compartmentalization comprises one of the fundamental risks to the delivery of today s production and the development of up coming fields Fox and Bowman, 2010 . This phenomenon has an impact across the full exploration and production value chain, from in-place volume estimation, recoverable reserve evaluation, and infrastructure planning to project economics Chen, 2013 . Therefore, recognizing and comprehending reservoir compartmentalization during the appraisal or early stages of field development is critical in preventing asset value erosion by driving up costs or introducing significant development risk, which can lead to project failure in extreme cases Fox and Bowman, 2010 . Due to the absence of dynamic production data, identifying reservoir compartmentalization during early field history is challenging Smalley and Muggeridge, 2010 , requiring multi-disciplinary analysis to maxi mize the synergy of available static subsurface data. The pre-production compartmentalization assessment has been proved to be assertive in case studies, the most common static data used are variations of petro leum fingerprints and PVT properties Smalley and England, 1994 Pe ters and Fowler, 2002 Weissenburger and Borbas, 2004 Milkov et al., 2007 Smalley and Muggeridge, 2010 , water geochemistry Gill et al., 2010 Permanyer et al., 2013 , static reservoir pressure and petroleum-water contact Smalley and Hale, 1996 Milkov et al., 2007 Tozer and Borthwick, 2010 Belhouchet et al., 2021 , conceptual geological models and fault sealing analyses based on seismic and well logs data McKie et al., 2010 Scott et al., 2010 Tozer and Borthwick, 2010 Wonham et al., 2010 . Because no single static data set analysis can forecast the compartmentalization phenomenon, a thorough inte gration of existing data is recommended to reduce and quantify reservoir connection uncertainty Milkov et al., 2007 . After 16 years of exploratory efforts, more than 240 wells drilled, and the discovery of one of the world s largest oil provinces, the pre-salt play remains an extremely attractive business Mello et al., 2021a . However, as exploration campaigns in the Santos Basin progressed, the scenario became more challenging due to a decrease in more evident and low-risk opportunities Rostirolla et al., 2021 , necessitating a better under standing and awareness of the geological uncertainties surrounding the pre-salt exploratory play. Among the causes of uncertainty for petro leum system elements proposed by Rostirolla et al. 2021 , reservoir heterogeneities and connectivity are one of the main factors affecting reservoir risk. The aim of this paper is to comprehend the uncertainty and estimate the degree of compartmentalization in a complex carbonate reservoir of the Brazilian pre-salt play using pre-production static data. To clarify this issue, we used the intriguing Iara Cluster of the Santos Basin as a case study. The pre-salt carbonate reservoirs are characterized by the faciological Wright and Barnett, 2015 Abelha and Petersohn, 2019 Gomes et al., 2020 Azere do et al., 2021 , depositional Sabato Ceraldi and Green, 2017 Farias et al., 2019 Minzoni et al., 2021 de Carvalho et al., 2021 Wright, 2022 and diagenetic Herlinger et al., 2017 Lima and De Ros, 2019 complexity, which is responsible for great lateral and vertical heterogeneities. This scenario is susceptible to the formation of static and or dynamic intraformational seals, which can act as flow barriers within the reservoir, enabling the segregation of the hydrocar bon accumulation. The method performed for compartmentalization modeling comprises the integration of a conceptual geological model of the Iara Cluster based on seismic facies interpretation with basic pet rophysical analysis, geopressure, fluid molecular composition and PVT properties interpretations. Furthermore, as an impact of low permeability zones, several step ping oil-water contacts can coexist in the same reservoir segment in a static and stable manner due to the static perched-water effect Rolfsva g and Danielsen, 2016 . This phenomenon is defined as movable water above the transition zone that is not directly connected to the actual free-water table of a given hydrocarbon column and occurs when satu rated conditions above a low permeability layer force the water to move vertically Gaafar et al., 2016 . Similar to reservoir compartmentalization, the implication of perched-water zones is the misunderstanding of reservoir behavior, leading to an incorrect esti mation of stock tank oil in place, reserve evaluation, well placement, and completion design, all of which can cause the propagation of potential expenditure for field development Gaafar et al., 2016 Rolfsva g and Danielsen, 2016 . Our study discusses the perched-water phenomenon in the same reservoir segment based on the recognition of significant over-pressured water zones. Then, the results and discussion raised by this study contribute to de-risking the reservoir quality in new explo ration ventures in stratigraphic-structural pre-salt prospects, as well as reinforcing the importance of an integrated multidisciplinary evaluation of static data to predict the early field development reservoir segments and consequently, prevent asset value erosion. 2. Geological and exploratory background 2.1. The Iara Cluster The Iara Cluster is a massive pre-salt structure with more than 300 km2 of extension in the northeast portion of the Santos Basin Fig. 1A , which encompasses three of the biggest accumulations of the basin Sururu, Berbiga o and Atapu. The first exploratory efforts in this area started in June 2000, with the concession of the BM-S-11A block from the 2nd Bidding Round under the Concession Regime. This was before the consolidation of the pre-salt as a play in the Santos Basin. The block is currently operated by a consortium between Petrobras 42.5 , Shell 25 , Total 22.5 and Petrogal 10 . Later, in September 2008, the well 1-BRSA-618-RJS discovered the Sururu accumulation. However, at the time, this discovery was interpreted as a non-segmented mega structure called Iara, spanning the entirety of the Iara Cluster. This was due to the poor quality of the seismic imaging and the almost complete absence of well data GaffneyCline, 2010 . In April 2012, the Berbiga o accumulation was discovered by the 3-BRSA-1032-RJS well. Both of those accumulations extended outside the limits of the BM-S-11A block into an area not yet contracted. Therefore, the Brazilian government decided to include an additional block called Entorno de Iara Iara Surrounding covering this area. Unlike the BM-S-11A block, this block was contracted and operated by Petrobras directly under the transfer of rights regime Petrobras, 2014 . In May 2013, the Atapu accumulation was discovered by the 1-BRSA-1146-RJS well inside this new block. Later, an extension of this structure to the eastern area of the BM-S-11A block was confirmed by the 3-BRSA-1243-RJS well Petrobras, 2014 . The Brazilian government offered the Atapu ring fence through the transfer of rights surplus regime in 2021, which was acquired by a consortium formed by Petrobras 52.5 , Total 22.5 , and Shell 25 . The Atapu ring fence is therefore subject to both the transfer of rights and the transfer of rights surplus regimes. In summary, as a result of the exploratory campaign in the Iara Cluster, three different accumulations were discovered Berbiga o, Sur uru and Atapu Petrobras, 2014 . Due to different kinds of E P regimes coexisting side-by-side, these three accumulations ended up being divided into eight different ring fences for contractual reasons Fig. 1B Berbiga o, Sururu, Oeste de Atapu West of Atapu , Norte de Berbiga o North of Berbiga o , Sul de Berbiga o South of Berbiga o , Sul de Sururu South of Sururu , Norte de Sururu North of Sururu and Atapu. The first three ring fences are under a concession regime, and the others are under a transfer of rights regime. 2.2. General geological settings and tectono-stratigraphic evolution of presalt sequence The formation of the Santos Basin began in the Late Jurassic with the destabilization and consequent fragmentation of West Gondwana, that resulted in the opening of the South Atlantic Ocean in the Early Creta ceous Heine et al., 2013 Rigoti, 2015 Dehler et al., 2016 . In this basin, this process took place on a complex and heterogeneous basement 2 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Fig. 1. A Iara Complex is located on the east-central portion of the Santos Basin, in southeast Brazil. B Ring fences of the fields brown and green polygons , the area covered by the seismic data a grey polygon with the survey name R0302 Franco Florim , and wells used in the study area. identified as the Proterozoic Ribeira Belt, which controlled the overall rifting architecture through structural inheritance Pereira and Macedo, 1990 Milani et al., 2005 Zalan et al., 2011 Gomes et al., 2012 Dehler et al., 2016 Matos et al., 2021 . The structural framework of the basin is characterized by regional NE-trending normal faults affected by E-W strike-slip transfer zones and a regional sinistral shear zone that forms an S-shaped feature in the northeastern region of the Santos Basin Matos et al., 2021 de Freitas et al., 2022 . The regional structural trend is again inflected to the NW-trend near the continent-ocean crustal transition Meisling et al., 2001 , with the fold axial trace located at the Boomerang structure Matos et al., 2021 . Based upon kinematic reconstruction methods, Heine et al. 2013 suggested a multi-phase and multi-directional extension history along the development of the South Atlantic rift, characterized in the Santos Basin by a general oblique extension and rifting. This obliquity enabled the formation of regional transfer zones that compartmentalized this basin Meisling et al., 2001 , as well as induced the formation of asso ciated strike-slip structures Souza, 2008 Stanton et al., 2014 . Dehler et al. 2016 identified a regional magnetic anomaly named Helmut , which is interpreted as a crustal-scale sinistral transtensive shear zone system active during the Late Aptian that affected the structural framework of the basin. This event possibly produced changes in fault ing regimes, formed several loci of transpression or transtension fea tures, rotated basement blocks, and affected crustal thinning and thickening processes. The Santos basin-fill history starts in the upper Valanginian Hau terivian with the deposition of basalts from the Camboriu Formation, representing the economic basement, and records the first signs of the West Gondwana fragmentation. During the early stages of the rift in the Barremian age, the half-grabens were filled by non-marine deposits from the Pic arras Formation, which is characterized by lacustrine sandstones, siltstones, and talc-stevensitic shales Moreira et al., 2007 Carlotto et al., 2017 . From the Neobarremian until the Eoaptian, the Itapema Formation was deposited in a lacustrine environment, and it is composed of the intercalation of coquinas bivalve rudstone, grainstone, wackestone, and packstone and black shale Moreira et al., 2007 Carlotto et al., 2017 Leite et al., 2020 . Extensive clinoforms succession with more than 100 3 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 m thick of coquinas was identified in Mero Field and interpreted by Barnett et al. 2020 as a large bar produced through the reworking of bivalves from lower energy depositional environments by shore-parallel currents. Such deposits comprise the best reservoir facies shown by well 2-ANP-2A-RJS Carlotto et al., 2017 . The top of the Itapema Formation is marked by a regional unconformity in the Santos Basin, known as the Pre-Alagoas Unconformity Moreira et al., 2007 . During the Aptian and within the Brazilian Alagoas Stage, the main pre-salt carbonate reservoirs of the Santos Basin were deposited, belonging to the Barra Velha Formation BVE . This formation is mainly lacustrine in origin and characterized by exotic carbonate texture as sociation, which consists of in-situ components described as fascicular calcite crystal shrubs, calcite spherulites, and mud, as well as reworked facies derived from those carbonates Lima and De Ros, 2019 Gomes et al., 2020 Wright and Barnett, 2017a . Microbialites have also been described in the Barra Velha Formation. However, these facies are considered rare and are mainly located in the uppermost 20 30m of the formation Wright and Barnett, 2015 2017a 2020 . In addition, in distal portions, there is a predominance of shales and mudstones Moreira et al., 2007 , as evidenced by the well 1-BRSA-886-RJS with 300 m of continuous shale located in the flank of the main depocenter of the Santos Basin de Freitas et al., 2022 . There is also an intra-formational unconformity named Intra-Alagoas Unconformity, dated 117 Ma, based on the Ar Ar method in synchronous basaltic lava flow deposits Moreira et al., 2007 . Whilst in the top of this formation there is an unconformity that precedes the evaporites of the Ariri For mation named Salt Base, characterized by an intense erosion process as described by Alves et al. 2017 . Magmatic events have been identified along all the pre-salt sequence in the Santos Basin, in addition to the Valanginian Hauterivian basalts of the Camboriu Formation, subaqueous basalts are identified inter bedded with sedimentary rocks in the Pic arras and Itapema formations dated between 121 and 130 Ma and in the lower Barra Velha Formation dated at 128 Ma Moreira et al., 2007 . In the Libra Block, Rancan et al. 2018 and Penna et al. 2019 identified different igneous suites with different ages and natures the first one comprises predominantly Bar remian Aptian tholeiitic basalts placed mostly in the Itapema Formation dated based on 40Ar 39Ar at 125,5 0,7 Ma, whilst the second one comprises Santonian Campanian intrusive alkaline hypabyssal rocks placed predominantly on the top of the Barra Velha Formation and locally in the Itapema Formation. In summary, Fig. 2 presents a simplified chronostratigraphic chart for the Iara Cluster. 2.3. The Barra Velha formation depositional setting The genesis of the Barra Velha Formation and the Macabu Forma tion, its equivalent in the Campos Basin, has been the subject of intense debate in the geoscientific community, owing to its unusual carbonate texture, considerable thickness and the lack of more typical carbonate lake deposits Muniz and Bosence, 2015, 2018 Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2017a, 2017b, 2020 Wright and Tosca, 2016 Ceraldi and Grenn, 2017 Chafetz et al., 2018 Pietzsch et al., 2018 Wright and Rodriguez, 2018 Farias et al., 2019 Lima and De Ros, 2019 Azere do et al., 2021 Barnett et al., 2021a, b, de Carvalho and Fernandes, 2021 Minzoni et al., 2021 Wright, 2022 . Most studies published agree about the overall depositional settings characterized by the non-marine alkaline lakes. However, as pointed out by Azere do et al. 2021 , some points still have not reached consensus among geoscientists, such as a the origin of carbonate fabric, whether it is biotic, biotic-induced, or abiotic b lake settings and their evolution over time c carbonate rock terminology and classification d genesis and significance of spherulites and the Mg-rich clays. The pre-salt carbonates of the Santos Basin were deposited in a continentally proportioned lacustrine setting that exceeds the area of the modern-lake Lake Tanganyika, the largest rift lake in the world Pietzsch et al., 2018 . This palaeolake is defined as a closed endorheic environ ment Szatmari and Milani, 2016 Farias et al., 2019 , which evolved for a long time completely disconnected from the oceans, basically controlled by the catchment areas and subsurface recharge system input Pietzsch et al., 2018 . Inferences based on the use of seismic-scale ge ometries such as clinoforms and draping as depositional relief proxies indicate significant bathymetry at the time of BVE carbonate deposition Buckley et al., 2015 Minzoni et al., 2021 . In general, large lacustrine systems can mimic the sequence-stratigraphic architecture of marine settings, except for the details of carbonate components and perhaps high-frequency stratigraphy Minzoni et al., 2021 . Taking this into consideration, Minzoni et al. 2021 suggested that the primary controls on the large-scale depositional architecture of continental carbonates from the Barra Velha Formation are the antecedent topography, subsi dence patterns, palaeowind direction, and the production rate of the Fig. 2. Simplified chronostratigraphic chart for the Iara Cluster, in the Santos Basin with contribution from Moreira et al., 2007 Buckley et al., 2015 Neves et al., 2019 Rancan et al., 2018 Wright, 2022 . 4 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 carbonate factory, which is affected by the carbonated fabric type and mainly the fluctuations in lake-water chemistry. On this basis, Fetter et al. 2018 highlighted the importance of the balance between the carbonate factory keep up and tectonic uplift related to elastic rebound and transpression features, to control the depositional architecture of this palaeolake. In the Santos Basin, the complex basement topography framework derived from the multi-phase oblique rift Zalan et al., 2011 Rigoti, 2015 process was induced by inheritance and reactivation, controlling the architecture of the carbonate systems and consequently, contrib uting to the control of its facies deposition Buckley et al., 2015 Minzoni et al., 2021 . The carbonate sediments of the Itapema and Barra Velha formations were accumulated in shallow waters upon or around struc tural palaeohighs within a deep lacustrine depositional context, where profundal facies were deposited on the structural depressions Buckley et al., 2015 Fetter et al., 2018 Neves et al., 2019 Gomes et al., 2020 Minzoni et al., 2021 . In contrast, based on petrographic and geochemical analysis, some studies Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2017b Wright and Rodriguez, 2018 Wright, 2022 Farias et al., 2019 suggest an overspread shallow, evaporitic, and alkaline lake model for the Barra Velha Formation, disregarding its possible rugged palaeotopography during deposition. This interpretation is mainly supported by the regional correlation of the BVE shallow water facies, characterized by the gamma ray log pattern known as Lula s Fingers or Marco Tupi , observed in several wells across the Santos Basin, which comprise on average 24.3 m defined by 9 gamma-defined cycles, and interpreted as one or more shallowing-upward cyclothems Wright and Barnett, 2017a 2017b Wright, 2022 . However, two possible pitfalls can be addressed in this model a this model can be easily biased since the pre-salt wells in those studies are derived from the structural highs of the Santos Basin, which are related to shallow-water platform settings owing to the current pre-salt exploratory play Minzoni et al., 2021 Wright, 2022 b the Marco Tupi facies are not related to the envi ronment described in the majority of the BVE carbonates and probably represent another depositional sequence associated with modified wa ters related to the first marine inflow in the basin de Carvalho and Fernandes, 2021 . In addition, Wright 2022 points out potential dif ficulties in interpreting seismic features due to the high structural complexity observed in basins containing BVE carbonates and their equivalents. Among the processes mentioned Wright, 2022 , the extension discrepancy and polyphase faulting, the effects of an outer margin collapse during the late Albian, and the reactivation and sub sequent inversion of faults Alves et al., 2017 could trigger a posterior deformation producing a relief at the top of the BVE unit, which could be confused with depositional relief. Despite the challenges behind the BVE and MCB carbonate charac terization and interpretation, major advances have been made in the last decade. Many studies Muniz and Bosence, 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2015 Wright and Tosca, 2016 Gomes et al., 2020 Azere do et al., 2021 de Carvalho and Fernandes, 2021 Wright, 2022 described the high-frequency cyclical nature of these deposits, which in general are characterized by a shallowing upward-increasing shrub stacking pattern composed of a transition from mudstone, to spherulitestone and, respectively, to shrubstone Gomes et al., 2020 and eventually to grainstones due to reworking processes. Gomes et al. 2020 based on the Farias et al. 2019 model, proposed a shallowing spherulite upward increasing facies stacking pattern, in which the shrubstone facies tran sition to spherulitestone with Mg-clay facies. In order to explain the coexistence of both facies stacking pattern models, Gomes et al. 2020 interpreted that these variations are the result of the balance between the sedimentary input and the lake chemistry in different climatic con ditions, the first being related to the transition from a humid to an arid environment and the second to a semi-arid to arid environment. Regardless the divergence of palaeobathymetric and depositional interpretation related to the BVE lake settings, the published models converge approximately in relation to the spatial gross facies distribution Saller et al., 2016 Ceraldi and Grenn, 2017 de Carvalho and Fernandes, 2021 Minzoni et al., 2021 Wright, 2022 . Whilst on the relative structural high position prevails the presence of reworked facies, shrubs dominated sedimentary facies and travertine, on the low structural position there is the occurrence of spherulite dominated facies, mudstones and even shales according to the prevalence of rela tive deeper water settings. 2.4. Hydrothermal activity evidence on pre-salt carbonates Hydrothermal systems are sets of processes that redistribute energy and mass in the earth through the circulation of hot fluids, laterally and vertically at various temperatures and pressures Norton, 1984 Pirajno, 1992 Pirajno, 2009 . The circulation of such hydrothermal fluids pro duces a complex process involving physico-chemical changes in preex isting rocks known as hydrothermal alteration Pirajno, 2009 Pirajno, 1992 . Other results of hydrothermal activity are subaerial and sub aqueous hot springs, common in volcanic and tectonic lakes as well as on the seafloor along mid-ocean ridges and in volcanic islands. Those sys tems occur in areas of high geothermal gradients due to ongoing or re sidual magmatic, or anomalous crustal conditions, and as a result of anomalous heat flow due to high concentrations of radioactive elements in the crust Pirajno, 2009 . In continental settings, those springs can produce travertine depositional environments related to hydrothermal vents, fissure ridges, rimstone dams, pools, and terrace features, as well as tufa depositional environments Jones and Renaut, 2010 de Filippis and Billi, 2012 Renaut et al., 2013 Mancini et al., 2019 . Evidence of syn and late hydrothermal systems has been reported in pre-salt settings of the Santos and Campos Basins Alvarenga et al., 2016 Herlinger Jr et al., 2017, de Luca et al., 2017 Oliveira and Rancan, 2018 Lima and De Ros, 2019 Lima et al., 2020 . The first piece of evidence is the hydrothermal alteration observed in the carbonates of the Barra Velha Ren et al., 2019 and Macabu de Luca et al., 2017 Lima and De Ros, 2019 Lima et al., 2020 formations characterized by hydraulic fracturing, silicification, dolomitization, dissolution, and precipitation of hydrothermal mineral phases such as saddle dolomite, macrocrystalline calcite, megaquartz, sulfides, and sulfates filling sec ondary porosity Lima et al., 2020 due to the interaction between the hot fluids focused by fault systems and the preexisting rocks. In northern Campos Basin, based on petrographic characterization, fluid inclusion analyses, and isotopic analysis, Lima et al. 2020 identified a late-stage deep-burial hydrothermal alteration in carbonates related to the Late Cretaceous and Paleogene magmatic events and possibly the rising and exhumation of the asthenosphere in addition to the interaction with the granitic-gneissic basement and the rift sedimentary succession. In the northern Santos Basin, Ren et al. 2019 identified a hydrothermal alteration related to the existence of a multi-stage magmatism mainly associated with Aptian and Santonian-Campanian magmatic events through hydrothermal minerals and fluid inclusion analysis. The second piece of evidence is hydrothermal vent systems that are defined by pipe-like complexes formed by the fracturing, transporting, and erupting of hydrothermal fluids and sediments Planke et al., 2005 . These depositional features occur in association with travertine conti nental rift systems, as observed in Lake Bogoria in the Kenya Rift Valley Renaut et al., 2013 . Those features are seismic-scale, and their recognition was discussed by Planke et al. 2005 and Hansen 2006 , which defined the seismic pattern of this structure related to intrusive events. Hydrothermal vents have been broadly identified in the sedi mentary basins of the Brazilian eastern margin at different stratigraphic levels, including in the pre-salt section of the Campos and Santos basins. Alvarenga et al. 2016 identified several intrusive-related hydrother mal vent complexes in the rift section of the Campos Basin Central platform. Oliveira et al. 2018 identified those complexes in the Eocene interval of the Espi rito Santo onshore basin, possibly related to the Abrolhos magmatic event. Oliveira and Rancan 2018 also identified these features in the Aptian interval in the northern portion of the Santos 5 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Basin. continuous seismic reflectors fluids in pressure equilibrium common petroleum-water contact fluids with similar or continuous PVT prop erties and fluids with similar fingerprints Milkov et al., 2007 . The first analysis performed consisted of the interpretation of seis mically imaged faults, unconformities, and seismic facies to comprehend the Iara structure in the pre-salt interval. The seismic interpretation was based on the identification and tracking of seismic reflectors correlated with key pre-salt unconformities registered in well logs, considering the amplitude, continuity, and reflector terminations. The seismic facies were defined by the external geometry and reflection configuration identified and subsequently compared with seismic patterns described previously in the bibliography, such as Mitchum et al. 1977 , Buckley et al. 2015 , Kattah and Balabekov 2015 , Alvarenga et al. 2016 , Saller et al. 2016 , Ferreira et al. 2019 , Minzoni et al. 2021 , and Ferreira et al. 2021 . We carried out this analysis on two scales a Semi-Regional - in this step-the basement and base of salt discontinuities were interpreted throughout the seismic volume, in order to understand the structural and depositional context of the target of this study b Detailed -in this stage-beyond the interpretation of the Pre-Salt key unconformities, such as the base of salt, Intra-Alagoas Unconformity and Pre-Alagoas Un conformity, the recognitions and description of seismic facies was per formed as well as the analysis of RMS Amplitude, Sweetness, Variance and Isochore maps extracted from the surfaces mentioned. The Base of Salt was interpreted as a high amplitude reflector, characterized by a positive acoustic impedance reflector with high lateral continuity, sparsely affected by faults, which can be correlated regionally. The Intra-Alagoas Unconformity is a high positive amplitude, fairly continuous, moderately affected by faults, and appears conform able in some palaeodepressions. The Pre-Alagoas Unconformity corre sponds to a low to medium amplitude discontinuous reflector intensively affected by faults. The key seismic patterns identified in this study are illustrated and characterized in Table 1. Environmental setting, depositional processes, and lithology esti mation can be interpreted through the three-dimensional relationship between seismic patterns Mitchum et al., 1977 . On this basis, a con ceptual geological model of the Iara Cluster was created, derived from the integration of the spatial distribution of the seismic facies associa tions observed throughout the Barra Velha formation, geometry of the main unconformities, and lacustrine carbonate depositional environ ment analogs described in Santos, Campos and Kwanza Basin Saller et al., 2016 Ceraldi and Grenn, 2017 de Carvalho and Fernandes, 2021 Minzoni et al., 2021 Wright, 2022 . This model was used to 3. Data and methods 3.1. Dataset and quality control The project database consists of a 3D-seismic cube and data from 17 wells provided by the Exploration and Production Data Bank BDEP from the Brazilian National Agency of Petroleum, Natural Gas and Biofuels ANP . The arrangement and location of the data used in this study are illustrated in Fig. 1. The post-stack depth-domain seismic volume used in this study covers 3709 km2 including the Iara pre-salt cluster, Itapu, as well as, parts of the Bu zios, Mero, and Se pia Oil Fields. The average seismic resolution observed in the pre-salt section is approximately 68 m. Despite the presence of noise features such as diffraction geometries and acquisition footprints, the volume, in general, expresses a good image quality, enabling the recognition and interpretation of the main seismic patterns, meeting the objectives of this work. In addition, we carried out a basic preconditioning workflow based on structural smoothing and filtering to improve the signal-to noise ratio. Of the 17 wells, eleven are exploratory wells and the others are development wells. The data used were well logs, rock and fluid sample reports, and, when available, basic petrophysical data reports. We per formed a calibration of the Salt Base between the seismic surface and the formation tops. This is necessary due to the uncertainty in the velocity processing model used to migrate the data. The maximum and minimum deviations estimated are 64 and 60 m, respectively, with an average value of 21.7 m. Moreover, we correlated four wells from Iara s accu mulations with the seismic, yielding a detailed analysis of the seismic facies. 3.2. Methodology Reservoir compartmentalization modeling is a multidisciplinary approach to identify and characterize fluid units, baffles, and barriers within a reservoir before production Smalley and Hale, 1996 Edman and Burk, 1999 Raba a and Nagel, 2004 Milkov et al., 2007 Jolley et al., 2010 Smalley and Muggeridge, 2010 Chen, 2013 . In this study, this workflow incorporates the integration of two main analyses, the seismic interpretation and the formation evaluation Fig. 3 . For non-segmented reservoirs with a low risk of flow barriers between two wells, we can expect no abrupt change in reservoir properties Fig. 3. Schematic flowchart used in this study, containing the main analyses performed. 6 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Table 1 Iara Cluster carbonate seismic facies SF classification summary and interpretation. qualitatively estimate the distribution of the large-scale lithofacies variations and faults, which are potential permeability barriers. Observations of fluid-related properties in different parts of the reservoir provide supporting evidence that there are physical barriers to the oil flow Smalley and Muggeridge, 2010 . Then, the second step of this study consisted of a formation evaluation, which encompassed qualitative analysis of well logs, geopressure data analysis, PVT prop erties, and composition evaluation of fluids. The well logs analysis enabled the identification of vertical permeability barrier zones and petroleum-water contact. The geopressure analysis used point static pressure measurements acquired by the modular formation dynamic tester MDT tool from eleven exploratory wells that tested the reservoir in virgin conditions, enabling the estimation of fluid gradients and free-water levels FWL . In addition, we analyzed 33 differential liber ation PVT property reports and 26 flash-liberation PVT compositional analysis reports obtained via gas chromatography. These reports con tained restricted data on the molecular composition and the fluid physical properties, enabling a basic comparison between oils sampled in different wells. Upon analysis, there were only five carbon and hydrogen isotopic data from methane samples present in this dataset. No individual analysis can provide a reliable prediction of reservoir compartmentalization Smalley and Hale, 1996 Edman and Burk, 1999 Raba a and Nagel, 2004 Milkov et al., 2007 Jolley et al., 2010 Smalley and Muggeridge, 2010 Chen, 2013 , therefore, a thorough integration 7 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 of the data available and models built were performed in order to reduce uncertainties in the reservoir compartmentalization evaluation and es timate the potential flow barrier and baffle locations. The integration tool applied in this study was the compartmentalization risk matrix CRM proposed by Milkov et al. 2007 . well as immediately next to the Iracema Fault System, which is the NE-trending continuity of the Outer Santos High Master Fault System Gomes et al., 2012 . The pre-salt section is deposited in grabens, half-grabens, and horsts underneath a thick evaporite sequence that exceeds 3 km in thickness. As a result of a complex oblique-sinistral extensional system locally represented by the sinistral shear zone related to the Helmut Anomaly Dehler et al., 2016 , the structural framework Fig. 4 of this basin s segment is characterized by the in flection of the regional NE NNE trend, observed in the Itapu Field, to the overall NW trend in the Iara Cluster location, which rotates back to the NE trend in the south, near the Se pia Field. The structural inflection areas exhibit a large-scale flexural folding geometry conditioned by the 4. Results 4.1. Semi-Regional structural context of Iara Cluster The Iara Cluster is located in the northeastern portion of the Santos Basin, and in the north of the Helmut Anomaly Dehler et al., 2016 , as Fig. 4. The Iara Cluster structural framework context. A Regional basement map of Santos Basin Modified from de Freitas et al., 2022 , encompassing the main basin depocenters Main Depocenter, North Depocenter and Central Depocenter , structural highs, and sub-basin boundaries SWSB, southwest Santos sub-basin SESB, southeast Santos sub-basin from de Freitas et al. 2022 the correspondent main oil kitchen Rostirolla et al., 2021 the Helmut Anomaly Dehler et al., 2016 B , A detailed Iara Cluster basement map containing three interpreted cross sections A-A , B B , and C C with emphasis on the spatial variation of the structural framework BBG, Berbiga o SRR, Sururu ATP, Atapu . 8 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Cluster structure where Atapu uplifted horst is the most elevated structural high, Berbiga o s rotated hemigrabens system occupies the deepest structural setting, whilst the Sururu structure is in an interme diary zone Fig. 5A . Despite the influence of lower order cycles and post-depositional fault systems, there is a positive correlation between the Pre -Alagoas Unconformity depth at present-day and the mudcarbonate proportion ratio gathered from the composite logs Fig. 5B . Thus, further fault activity in general preserved the overall stratigraphic architecture of the Iara Cluster during the Jiquia Stage, in which deeper lake water conditions prevailed in Berbiga o and the western portion of Sururu whilst at the structural highs of the Sururu and Atapu shallower lake water setting prevailed enabling the deposition of coquina banks Fig. 5A . The Pre -Alagoas Unconformity is predominantly conformable with the superior reflectors however, there are local vestiges of erosion defined by angular and erosional truncation. In the study area, this seismic unit correlated with the Itapema interval is predominantly characterized by subhorizontal to horizontal parallel seismic patterns associated to continuous and high amplitude SF 1B in the Berbiga o and in the western Sururu low-angle clinoform seismic patterns asso ciated to semicontinuous to continuous related to downlap termination and moderate amplitude SF-3 near the well 3-BRSA-891A-RJS location in the southern slope of the Sururu, and intensive sequence thinning associated to semiparallel to wavy seismic pattern and discontinuous reflectors with moderate to low amplitude on the top of the Atapu structure. structural inheritance of the Proterozoic dextral transpressional Ribeira belt, as shown by Matos et al. 2021 . This configuration results in a regional S -shaped structural architecture in the eastern Santos Basin that is strongly influenced by a strike-slip component. The Iara Cluster comprises a vast four-way structural closure at the Aptian level composed by three internal pre-salt structural highs known as Berbiga o, Sururu and Atapu separated from each other by extensive grabens associated with local relay ramps. The regional bimodal struc tural framework trend is represented in the Iara Cluster two fault families are clearly observed, characterized by a main NW-trend asso ciated with a subordinate NE-trend Fig. 4 . Despite the proximity of the fields, a distinct structural architecture is observed. The Berbiga o structural framework is mainly characterized by a depressed basement relief with thick syn-rift filling associated with NW-trending rotated hemigrabens with NE dip directions moreover, secondary antithetic faults and NE-trending faults are observed, including NE sinistral strikeslip transfer faults. The Sururu structural framework comprises an intermediary basement relief characterized by a sequence of interca lated NE-trending horsts and grabens highly associated with relay ramps. The Atapu accumulation is situated on top of an expressive rhombohedral-shaped basement structural high formed by a trans pressive uplift caused by the accommodation of oblique rifting faults in the Helmut sinistral shear zone settings. In the study area, syn and post-deposition faults were identified, affecting all of the pre-salt sequence. The Itapema formation and lower rift intervals are structurally most affected, indicating high tectonic activity. Moreover, expressive reactivated faults and growth faults were identified, affecting the lower and upper Barra Velha formations, indi cating the concomitance between sedimentary filling and structural activity. Therefore, the tectonic subsidence and its lateral variations along fault families were an important control of the BVE exotic car bonate deposition and facies distribution in Iara Cluster, and conse quently in lateral variation of reservoir quality. The reactivation of preexisting faults caused the structural inversion of certain fault families, mainly in the Berbiga o and Sururu regions, as well as at the inflection point of the regional structural trend, as in the northwest of Atapu. 4.2.2. Barra Velha formation The lower Barra-Velha formation was sampled by all the wells in this study, and is defined by the first occurrence of in-situ carbonates Minzoni et al., 2021 . The few petrography reports available in the dataset describe the predominance of mudstone-spherulitestone inter calation in this interval regardless of the wells structural position. The upper limit of this unit is characterized by the Intra-Alagoas Unconfor mity IAU , which is represented by a regional, trackable positive amplitude reflector. The IAU structural map varies between 5140 and 6800 m, and dis plays the same structural trend as the PAU structural map Fig. 6A . The thickness of the Lower Barra Velha formation Fig. 6B varies greatly along the structural framework, indicating the importance of tectonic control on the deposition and, consequently, in the facies distribution. The highest values of thickness are associated with growth strata, whereas the lowest values are related to erosional settings mainly observed in Berbiga o and Atapu. The seismic unit corresponding to the Lower Barra Velha Formation is characterized by the lack of continuity and low amplitude contrast of seismic reflectors, even resulting in a reflection-free seismic pattern Fig. 7 . However, locally, there are continuous parallel patterns asso ciated with a medium to high amplitude in the Berbiga o Field and the western portion of the Sururu Field. Also, there are semiparallel discontinuous seismic patterns associated with onlap reflector termi nations in the northwestern portion of the Atapu Field. The absence of seismic pattern diversity in the lower Barra Velha Formation could be associated with the facies homogeneity, as shown by the petrography reports. The co-rendering of the amplitude seismic with the cosine of the phase attribute highlights the internal reflection of this unit, reveals and enhances progradational clinoform seismic patterns in the north of Sururu Field, and creates a backstepping pattern in the south. Fig. 7 . The upper Barra Velha Formation comprises the interval above the IAU and is limited by the Base of Salt unconformity Moreira et al., 2007 Buckley et al., 2015 Carlotto et al., 2017 Minzoni et al., 2021 . Ac cording to the petrography reports, this unit mainly comprises a com plex stratigraphic succession characterized by cycles of in-situ carbonates defined by mudstones, spherulitestone, shrubstone, and reworked facies derived from these components Gomes et al., 2020 , as well as subordinary dolostone, silexite, and local occurrences of 4.2. Seismic stratigraphy interpretation of Iara Cluster As a result of the detailed interpretation and classification of seismic patterns differentiated by geometry and reflection character, five main seismic facies were identified Tabular, Mound, Bank, Chaotic Lens, Filling. There are important variations in the tabular seismic unit in relation to its structural position, which motivated its subdivision. Other seismic patterns with a smaller regional scope, such as karst features, were also recognized but were not mapped due to their scale. The main seismic facies recognized and mapped of the Iara Cluster are summa rized in Table 1. 4.2.1. Itapema Formation The Itapema Formation was sampled in 15 wells 4 in Berbiga o, 3 in Sururu and 8 in Atapu. As shown in previous work Moreira et al., 2007 Carlotto et al., 2017 Leite et al., 2020 , the Itapema Formation is constituted by the intercalation of coquinas and shales mudstones. The transition between this unit and the Barra Velha Formation is defined by a funnel gamma ray pattern related to the occurrence of shales, infor mally known as Jiquia , in the most radioactive portion, or by the occurrence of coquinas, which is defined by a cylindrical gamma ray pattern. De Freitas et al. 2022 analyzed the organic geochemistry of well samples in the Santos Basin, including the 1-BRSA-618-RJS, 3-BRSA-891A-RJS, and 3-BRSA-1172-RJS from Sururu and Atapu fields, and pointed out a high source rock interval potential with high content of TOC up to 15.9 and kerogen type I related to the Jiquia member interval. The Jiquia Stage was highly affected and controlled by the tectonic activity related to the rift phase of the Santos Basin, shaping the Iara 9 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Fig. 5. A Map of the Pre-Alagoas Unconformity containing gross rock facies pie-charts of Itapema Formation B Scatterplot between Mud-Carbonate Ratio and SSTVD in meters, showing a low correlation trend in a grey line. travertine. The Base of Salt BS structural map varies between 6470 and 4880 m, and introduces the mounded seismic features along the NW align ment trend or as an isolated geometry Fig. 8A . The thickness of the upper Barra Velha Fig. 8B also varies greatly along the structural framework. The highest values of thickness are associated in this in terval with mound seismic facies and growth strata features, whereas the lowest values are related to erosional settings, mainly in the Atapu Field. The seismic interval corresponding to this unit is characterized by a high diversity of seismic patterns Figs. 9 and 10 . The most outstanding seismic features observed in the Iara Cluster are the carbonate mounds, which are characterized by mounded external geometry associated with low amplitude contrast, and chaotic or convex internal reflections. This feature is deeply structurally controlled, occurring mainly along the major fault systems in the border of horsts, forming and producing mound ridges or an isolated mound. The aggradational stacking pattern and thickening of the BVE interval along these structures indicate the synchronicity between the fault activity and the carbonate deposition. The height of the identified mounds varies between 120 and 360 m, with 275 m as the mean value. On the top of the structural highs, there is a predominance of tabular external geometry associated with wavy to horizontal semiparallel continuous seismic reflection with low to moderate amplitude Figs. 9 and 10 SF-1B . The tabular geometry seismic pattern also occurs in the structural lows, but with higher amplitude contrast and a highly parallel continuous seismic pattern SF-1A , as clearly observed in the Berbiga o structure Fig. 9 . The transition between these two seismic patterns occurs abruptly, either associated with faults or through slope-related seismic patterns such as progradational clinoforms SF-3 and filling features SF-4 . The clinoforms are steep 15 , achieving 60 locally in some areas , and their profiles are predominately sigmoidal and obliqueparallel. Some authors suggest a dominance of reworked coarse-grained sediments or in-situ boundstone accumulation on the upper slope of this feature Buckley et al., 2015 Ferreira et al., 2019, 2021 Minzoni et al., 2021 . The recognition and spatial delimitation of external filling seismic geometry were determinants for inferring significant lateral variation of depositional facies in the upper Barra Velha Lake System. These features in the lower slopes are characterized by an onlap front slope fill, indi cating a retrogradational stacking pattern with a predominance of relatively deeper lake deposits. We identified possible pool features through the fill geometry at the top of the platform. The distal basins associated with the post-slope front fill setting are characterized by a high amplitude parallel seismic pattern, therefore, amplitude attributes 10 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Fig. 6. A The Intra-Alagoas Unconformity map for the Iara structure, which represents the top of the lower Barra Velha formation B The lower Barra Velha formation thickness map and the thickness distribution in meters. Note the fault influence on the deposition of the Barra Velha formation, encompassing the formation thickening toward the active fault wall and the thinning of structurally higher portions due to erosion. are important tools for the spatial delimitation of this feature. Further more, the spatial distribution of these elements indicates an asymmetric large-scale architecture margin in eastern Sururu Fig. 7 , which is a possible result of the windward-leeward effect Minzoni et al., 2021 . 4.3.2. 2 pressure-volume-temperature PVT properties and fluid sample composition The comparison of reservoir fluid composition and properties can indicate dissimilarity between reservoir fluid segments. Furthermore, understanding how fluid properties vary in depth is essential for esti mating post-accumulation processes such as gravitational segregation and fluid displacement. On this basis, we interpreted PVT properties and composition data derived from downhole fluid samples, wireline for mation tests, and extended well tests. This analysis supported the observed complexity between Iara reservoirs Table 3 . The Berbiga o, Sururu and Atapu reservoirs contain oil with associated gas. There is no clear evidence of gradational segregation in the Atapu and North Berbiga o reservoirs since there is no clear trend in API gravity variations with depth, which vary mainly from 26 to 30 API. The fluid samples from the South Berbiga o accumulation well show variations. In the Sururu Field, a clear slight decrease in these values is observed with depth ranging from 21.5 to 27.5 API , which may be a callsign for gradational segregation Fig. 12 . There is a strong distinction between the saturation pressure signa tures of the reservoirs studied. Berbiga o samples show low values with small variations related to well 4-BRSA-1226-RJS Table 3 . The Sururu samples present intermediate values with strong variation, conditioned by the increase in depth Fig. 12B . The Atapu samples, on the other hand, show higher values with low variability, with the exception of a sample from the 3-BRSA-1172-RJS wells, which is an accumulation in the reservoirs of the Itapema formation. The saturation pressure presents a strong positive correlation with Bo therefore, in short, Berbiga o pre sents lower values than Sururu, which in turn presents lower values than Atapu Fig. 12C . The solubility ratio Rs exhibits a strong positive correlation with the saturation pressure Fig. 13E . Thus, this property also shows important distinctions between Iara structures Fig. 13A . The Berbiga o reservoirs have the lowest values for this property, referring to 76 m3 std m3 std. However, despite the lack of data density, the values from 4.3. Formation evaluation 4.3.1. Integrated pressure survey analysis The initial pressure of the Iara Cluster reservoirs is greater than the bubble-point pressure therefore, it is classified as an undersaturated oil reservoir and exhibits a single liquid hydrocarbon phase. In order to evaluate the communication between the Iara Cluster fields, a detailed geopressure plot analysis was performed and calibrated with some well fluid samples. Thereafter, based on the resistivity log integrated with NMR porosity curves and gamma ray, the oil-water contact was esti mated. The result of this analysis is summarized in Table 2. The field consolidated formation geopressure plot Fig. 10 indicates that the Sururu and Atapu reservoirs have similar oil gradients, 0.0785Kgf cm2 m and 0.0777 Kgf cm2 m. On the other hand, not all of Berbiga o s structures are connected in the same oil zone, as two oil gradients were clearly observed Fig. 11A . The main one is slightly different from those of the Sururu and Atapu fields 0.0809 Kgf cm2 m , while the second one, obtained by the well 3-BRSA-1032-RJS, is quite different 0.0989 Kgf cm2 m . Furthermore, different water gradients and, consequently, free water levels related to the main oil gradients of the Berbiga o and Atapu fields were observed. In general, they present similar water gradients around 0.1125 Kgf cm2 m and are parallelly shifted in depth. This arrangement forms a horse-tail shape in the plot Fig. 11D . It is noteworthy that due to the high clay content in the Sururu Field water zone, there were few reliable pressure sampling points in this interval, impairing the estimation of the water gradient by linear regression, but the free-water level was qualitatively estimated by the arrangement of the dataset. 11 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Fig. 7. NW-SE seismic line through the Sururu Field with an emphasis on the lower and upper Barra Velha Formation intervals. a Uninterpreted seismic line with the position of the well 3-BRSA-891A-RJS indicated b Corendering between the amplitude seismic line with a red-white-black color table and the cosine of the phase attribute with 40 of opacity, highlighting the internal seismic reflection of the Pre-salt interval c Interpretation of seismic facies showing the architecture of the BVE. Note the relevance of the spatial distribution of seismic facies the structural lows present plane-parallel reflectors with strong amplitude contrast that onlaps over inclined reflectors analogous to clinoforms located on slopes. At the top of the platform, semi-parallel reflectors with lower amplitude contrast are observed, there is also the effect of reactivated faults on the deposition of the Barra Velha formation. the well 4-BRSA-1226-RJS can indicate an increasing gradient toward the top of the reservoir. The Sururu reservoirs have a wide intermediary distribution, ranging from 123 to 217 m3std m3std with a clearly negative correlation trend between the Rs and depth, which corrobo rates the gradational segregation indicated in the API gravity plot. The highest values are observed in the Atapu reservoirs, at 241 m3std m3std. The only exception is the oil sample from the Itapema reservoir section of well 3-BRSA-1172-RJS, which shows lower values of Rs and all other properties, indicating a possible local vertical fluid compartmentaliza tion in the Atapu Field related to the Jiquia shale sealing behavior. There is different CO2 contamination content associated with the gas phase of those oil accumulations Fig. 13B . The Berbiga o reservoirs have the lowest contamination, ranging from 0.1 to 3.37 . There is a slight internal variation, since southern Berbiga o well 4-BRSA-1226RJS shows decreasing CO2 contamination with depth, indicating local compositional gradation, while the other wells do not show a clear trend despite having a slight difference between them. The Sururu reservoirs have high variability of CO2 content, ranging from 23.5 to 33.5 , associated with a negative correlation also indicating compositional gradation. With the exception of the sample from the Itapema reservoir 12 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Fig. 8. A The Base of Salt map for the Iara structure, which represents the top of the upper Barra Velha formation BVE B The upper Barra Velha formation BVE thickness map and its thickness distribution C The total Barra Velha formation BVE thickness map and its distribution. Note the overall thinning of BVE in the Atapu structure in relation to the Sururu and Berbiga o structures throughout the geological history the growth of carbonate mounds during the deposition of the upper BVE and its expressive relative thickening. in the Atapu Field well 3-BRSA-1172-RJS , there is a low variability of CO2 contamination, ranging from 27 to 30 , with no correlation observed. The C1 content in the reservoir fluid per depth plot Fig. 13C ex hibits the same patterns discussed above, reinforcing the clearly observed compositional gradient in the Sururu reservoirs. The only exception is observed in the Berbiga o reservoirs, which exhibit an in crease in C1 values with depth and a dispersed relative distribution. This unexpected trend may be related to the existence of fluid compart mentalization between the three locations drilled, since the Southern Berbiga o 4-BRSA-1226-RJS has higher values than the Western Berbiga o 3-BRSA-1032-RJS , which in turn has higher values than the Eastern Berbiga o 3-BRSA-1132-RJS . The PVT compositional analysis through gas chromatography points out internal dissimilarities between the wells, mainly in the Berbiga o and Sururu reservoirs, as well as external differences between the Iara oilfields Fig. 14 . In general, Berbiga o reservoirs have a higher content of C2 C20 compounds and lower values of C1 and CO2 in relation to the other fields. Dissimilarities of hydrocarbon compounds between Berbiga o wells are mostly clear in the C1 C3 interval and C20 . The reservoir fluid components of Sururu and Atapu are quite similar, except for the C20 and the interval C12 C16. The oil sample from the Itapema Reservoir s Atapu field collected from well 3-BRSA-1172-RJS is different from the other samples collected in Atapu, corroborating the local ver tical oil pool segmentation hypothesis in this field. Furthermore, internal dissimilarities in the Sururu field are also clear in the C12 C16 interval and in the C20 . The ascending gradational aspect observed in the C20 peak in south Berbiga o corroborates the hypothesis of gradational segregation. 4.3.3. 3 carbon and hydrogen isotopes of associated gas samples Five reports of carbon and hydrogen isotopes from methane samples were analyzed two in Berbiga o, one in Sururu and two in Atapu. Berbiga o samples were acquired in wells 3-BRSA-1032-RJS and 4-BRSA1226-RJS they present, respectively, 13C C1 values of 45.174 and 41.965, as well as 2H C1 values of 171.72 and 174.90. The Sururu sample was acquired by well 9-BRSA-1212-RJS, showing 39.051 of 13C C1 and -150.902 of 2H C1. The Atapu samples were acquired in wells 1-BRSA-1146-RJS and 4-BRSA-1284-RJS, which show very low variability between them, the values obtained for 13C C1 are, respec tively, - 38.256 and 38.365 while for 2H C1 they are 145.128 and 145.185. 5. Discussion 5.1. Iara Cluster conceptual geological model Overlapping the structurally rugged relief of the Iara Complex sub strate, the Itapema Formation Barremian to Aptian was deposited, mostly associated with a deep lacustrine system, which resulted in the prevalence of shales and mudstones along the Berbiga o hemigrabens and the Sururu horst and graben systems Fig. 5 . However, the high relative position of some palaeohorsts enabled the formation of a highenergy shallower lake water system that produced coquina bank 13 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Fig. 9. SW-NE seismic line through the Iara Cluster with an emphasis on the lower and upper Barra Velha Formation interval. a An uninterpreted seismic line with the positions of the 3-BRSA-1132-RJS, 3-BRSA-1171D-RJS, 8-ATP-4D-RJS, and 3-BRSA-1172-RJS wells indicated b Corendering between the amplitude seismic line with a red-white-blue color table and the cosine of the phase attribute with 40 opacity, highlighting the internal seismic reflection of the pre-salt interval c Interpretation of seismic facies showing the architecture of the BVE. Note the radical difference in the spatial distribution of seismic facies throughout the Iara Cluster In Berbiga o structure prevails the contrast of high-amplitude parallel seismic unit SF-1A and the carbonate mounds, there is also the remarkable erosion of the lower BVE footwall and the thickening of hangingwall In Sururu an overall tabular geometry prevails with a lower amplitude parallel seismic unit SF 1B and a downstepping seismic unit SF-3 associated with faults A major syn-hemigraben separates the Sururu and Atapu structures, in which the contrast of carbonate mounds SF-2 and a lower-amplitude seismic unit SF 1B prevails. deposits mainly in the Atapu Field and also locally in the Sururu Field Fig. 5 . At the top of the Itapema Formation in the Atapu Field, there is the occurrence of a highly radioactive shale. This shale, a.k.a. the Jiquia member, is interestingly important because it not only presents a high source rock potential with a high dispersion throughout the area de Freitas et al., 2022 but it can also function as a seal, segmenting vertically different oil composition pools Fig. 14 . Furthermore, there are occurrences of clinoforms SF 3B related to the Itapema Formation in the northwest and southeast of the Sururu slopes Fig. 7 morpho logically analogous to the Mero Field Carlotto et al., 2017 Oliveira 14 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Fig. 10. A composite seismic line approximately NW-SE through the Atapu structure, with an emphasis on the lower and upper Barra Velha Formations interval. a Uninterpreted seismic line with the positions of the 3-BRSA-1243-RJS, 3-BRSA-1172-RJS, 1-BRSA-1146-RJS, and 9-BRSA-1284-RJS wells indicated b Corendering between the amplitude seismic line with a red-white-blue color table and the cosine of the phase attribute with 40 of opacity, highlighting the internal seismic reflection of the pre-salt interval c Interpretation of seismic facies showing the architecture of the BVE. Note the internal complexity of the Atapu spatial dis tribution of seismic facies the northwest portion is characterized by the north carbonate mound system with internal downstepping reflection pattern and associates collapse feature, the tabular parallel seismic unit onlap over the mound system the central portion is characterized by the central carbonate mound system which is separate by a syn-hemigrabens and was tested by the 3-BRSA-1243-RJS and 3-BRSA-1172-RJS wells the southeast portion is characterized by a reactivated horst associated to tabular parallel seismic facies and tested by the 1-BRSA-1146-RJS well which confirmed the abundant presence of reworked carbonate facies. et al., 2021 Petersohn et al., 2021 . However, these seismic facies occur below the oil-water contact and were not drilled by wells, not allowing for their calibration. The lower Barra Velha Formation predominantly presents vertical stacking of plane-parallel seismic facies with the prevalence of spheru lites and laminites. The palaeodepth of the alkaline lake systems forming the BVE is still under debate. Several authors Wright and Barnett, 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2017a Herlinger et al., 2017 Ceraldi and Grenn, 2017 Lima and De Ros, 2019 Gomes et al., 2020 Minzoni et al., 2021 Wright, 2022 agree that spherulites and laminites are deposited at greater water depths than shrub and reworked facies. Therefore, we interpret the aggradational stacking of relatively deeper lacustrine facies above the platforms as prevalent in the lower Barra Velha Formation. Reactivation of the palaeohighs related to strong erosional behavior of IAU is observed mainly in eastern Berbiga o and Sururu areas. Locally, in the eastern Sururu horst, we observed a strong pro gradational seismic pattern, whereas in the south, a backstepping seismic pattern prevailed Fig. 7 . This architecture can be a response to a differential subsidence rate related to the uplift of the reactivated fault system that affects the balance between the carbonate factory keep-up, 15 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Table 2 Summary of geopressure and well log analysis for free water level FWL and oil-water contact OWC estimation. Wells Oil Zone Water Zone 3 Atapu Reservoir 1-BRSA-1146-RJS 3-BRSA-1172-RJS 3-BRSA-1243-RJS 9-BRSA-1284-RJS 9-ATP-3-RJS 8-ATP-4D-RJS 8-ATP-5-RJS Sururu Reservoir 1-BRSA-618-RJS 3-BRSA-891A-RJS 9-BRSA-1212-RJS Berbiga o Reservoir 3-BRSA-1032-RJS 3-BRSA-1132-RJS 4-BRSA-1226-RJS 9-BBG-1D-RJS 8-SBBG-1-RJS 3 Density kg m Gradient kgf cm m Density kg m3 Gradient kgf cm3 m FWL m OWC m Transition Zone m 764.06 766.54 778.19 771.73 762.65 762.58 766.19 0.07641 0.07665 0.07782 0.07717 0.07627 0.07626 0.07662 1145.3 1197.2 1147.2 1159.1 1301.4 0.11453 0.11972 0.11472 0.11519 0.13014 5612.1 5599.5 5573.2 5587.2 5597.6 5610.8 5594.2 5571.1 5586 5587.5 1.3 5.3 2.1 1.2 10.1 783.58 773.83 783.19 0.07836 0.07738 0.07832 1295.3 0.12953 5721.4 5720.4 1 989.69 816.56 813.64 819.7 788.63 0.09897 0.08165 0.08137 0.08197 0.07886 1167 1188.2 0.11671 0.11882 5705.9 5786.8 5694.1 5697.3 11.8 89.5 consequently, in the maintenance of the carbonate facies distribution, and in putting distal facies in high relief locations. During the deposition of upper BVE, carbonate towers were depos ited due to the outbreak of geothermal fluids possibly enriched in Ca 2 and HCO3- in the surface along reactivated deep-seated faults. The complex structural framework of the Iara Cluster, influenced by a possible regional transfer zone, probably focalized the occurrence of hydrothermal activity similar to other modern geothermal deposits Brogi et al., 2014 DeMott et al., 2021 . The external geometrical result of those systems was diverse mound-type deposits SF-2 distributed along the NE-trending faults Fig. 15 , which are distinctly observed in the seismic section and constitute at least four main mound systems. The wells that tested the carbonate reservoirs related to these mound fea tures found outstanding net pay and a high productivity index. The central mound system in the Atapu area is dome-shaped with flat-lying basal concordance, onlapping overburden relationship, and chaotic internal geometry Fig. 10 . They are separated by a syn-tectonic parallel geometry with high amplitude. The northeast mound Fig. 10 system is characterized by a dome-shaped external geometry with a truncational basal relationship, which could be a result of hydrothermal breccia deposits Planke et al., 2005 , and an onlapping overburden relationship, as well as a downlapping internal geometry that indicates a possible NE progradation of the venting. The high amplitude parallel seismic unit SF-1A onlaps this carbonate mound, this contact can be a major reservoir property variation. Travertine and carbonate breccia facies have been described in the 3-BRSA-1284-RJS lithology report associated with these seismic facies in the southeast area of Atapu. The Sururu and Berbiga o twin mound systems occur in the western portion of the Iara Cluster, separated from each other by an extensive graben Fig. 9 . The Sururu mound trend follows the S structural framework of the region, culminating in a major mound feature in the Sepia Field that has been recently drilled, and confirmed a discovery with an outstanding effective oil column. Those mounds are character ized by a dome-shaped external geometry associated with flat-lying basal concordance, onlapping overburden relationship, and chaotic in ternal geometry Fig. 9 . In the Berbiga o area, the basal concordance is characterized by an angular unconformity, and the internal geometry locally exhibits aggradational internal convex-upward reflectors, which is highlighted by the contrast with the surrounding high amplitude parallel seismic unit. The southwestern mound trend of the Sururu Field was drilled by the well 3-BRSA-1212-RJS, which in wellcore photog raphy exhibits steep shrubstone crust possibly deposited in epigean conditions by the thermal water flowing from the vent along the lateral slopes or in hypogean conditions related to the infilling of vertical to the tectonic uplift, and the aggradation stacking that control the rift lake setting, as presented by Fetter et al. 2018 . Although this architecture has already been described in other portions of the Santos pre-salt province Minzoni et al., 2021 , we cannot neglect the influence of seismic illumination and resolution in the interpretation of this feature. Therefore, we recommended that those patterns be confirmed in a higher-resolution seismic dataset. Tectonic reactivation increases from the IAU to the Base of Salt, resulting in a variety of seismic patterns throughout the Upper Barra Velha Formation. Throughout the BVE deposition, the Atapu area has the highest relative relief Fig. 8 . It was most likely experiencing tec tonic uplift as a result of the restraining bend caused by the accommo dation of tectonic blocks in the Iracema transfer zone Fig. 4 . In this context, a considerable thinning of this unit has been identified Fig. 8 , indicating a possible imbalance between uplift and carbonate fabric maintenance, resulting in evaporitic concentration of the palaeolake as well as sub-aerial exposition. The predominant seismic pattern identi fied is a low amplitude discontinuous parallel seismic unit SF 1B , which is interpreted as a shallow alkaline lake associated with strong reworking processes Fig. 15 . This interpretation is supported by the lithology descriptions of the wells 1-BRSA-1146-RJS and 3-BRSA-1284RJS which indicate the intercalation of shrubstones, grainstones, and rudstones, as well as spherulitestones. In contrast, the other structures occupied relatively deeper alkaline lake settings compared with the Atapu area. The Sururu area displays a predominance of an aggradational low amplitude parallel seismic pattern SF 1B associated with high internal reflector frequency on the top of the platform, while the northwest portion exhibits a front-slope fill pattern SF-5 characterized by an onlap surface that culminates below the seismic resolution Fig. 7 , and in the southeast there is a highangle slope, defining an asymmetrical platform. The petrography report and wellcore sample photography of the wells 1-BRSA-618-RJS, 3BRSA-1181D-RJS, and 3-BRSA-891A-RJS that drilled the seismic pattern appointed indicate the predominance of mudstones and spherulites along the Upper Barra Velha Formation. Therefore, we interpreted that Sururu represents an aggradational stacking of relative distal alkaline lacustrine carbonate deposits related to a cyclical platform drowning through the NW low-angle slope in a proximal sublittoral environment. The Berbiga o area represents an even further relative distal setting Fig. 15 , and it is characterized by a carbonate ramp platform restricted in the upper portions of a hemigrabens system surrounded by profundal deposits represented by the high-amplitude parallel seismic pattern SF1A . Reactivation and fault reversal is distinctly observed in the area, which is interpreted with a major control on the subsidence and, 16 Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 J.C.S. Vital et al. Fig. 11. The field consolidated geopressure plots showing the oil and water gradients with the corresponding free-water levels A Berbiga o Reservoir B Sururu Reservoir C Atapu Reservoir D Comparison between the estimated oil gradients and water gradients. subvertical fractures, conducting the thermal water upwelling as in recent travertine deposits Brogi et al., 2014 . In addition, barite-cemented hydraulic carbonate breccias are described Sousa Ju nior, 2020 , possibly formed by the high-pressure upwelling hydro thermal fluids. However, the height of these mounds is larger than recent lake carbonate towers, one of the largest described is placed on Pyramid Lake at nearly 100 m Benson, 1994 . The seismic morphology described for these features is totally anal ogous to the hydrothermal vents described by Planke et al. 2005 , Hansen 2006 Alvarenga et al. 2016 , the only missing feature is the intrusion event as a source system. This can be the result of the low seismic resolution of the dataset used as indicated by Oliveira and Rancan 2018 , or these vents are linked to the natural exhumation of mantle CO2 during the BVE deposition through the deep-fault systems. Further reactivation of these systems after the salt deposition could trigger new upwellings of CO2-enriched fluids that were trapped and, consequently, contaminated the reservoir fluid, as observed mainly in the Sururu and Atapu fields. Based on those observations, we interpreted that the mound units in Table 3 Summary of basic PVT and main reservoir fluid compositional properties. Characteristics API gravity Solubity Ratio m3Std m3Std Saturation Pressure Kgf cm2 Bo m3 m3Std CO2 in Reservoir Fluid C1 in Reservoir Fluid Gas Phase Dryness C20 in Reservoir Fluid Accumulations Berbiga o A Berbiga o B Sururu Atapu 19.23 28.24 63.10 97.09 138.40 161.60 1.20 1.28 0.05 1.85 20.86 26.25 51.07 71.60 128.50 140 1.17 1.24 0.16 0.33 31.63 35.38 1.68 2.51 14.41 25.71 30.79 33.62 2.18 2.44 17.69 38.51 21.19 28.68 123.40 216.69 233.40 347.20 1.34 1.56 17.04 25.76 34.58 39.13 3.40 4.09 8 12.37 26.55 28.4 104.64 259.06 167.20 384.60 1.32 1.67 8.27 22.19 31.79 40.91 2.38 4.15 7.55 12.42 17 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Fig. 12. PVT property scatter plots A API-Depth cross-plot B Saturation Pressure bubble-point pressure -Depth cross-plot Saturation Pressure-Bo cross-plot. condensate Pa o de Ac u car discovery de Luca et al., 2017 in the Campos Basin, characterized by hydrothermally altered silicified carbonate on top of a paleovolcanic edifice onlapped by the deep lake profundal marls and shales beneath the salt unit, brought attention to the role of stratigraphic-structural entrapment. The identification of a stratigraphic closure related to lateral facies variation and pinch-out demands deeper seismic interpretation work flows. In pre-salt studies, this analysis is even more critical, due to the low seismic resolution and the fact that the thinner the pay zone, the harder it is to image the lateral trap Dolson et al., 2018 , which can be below the tuning thickness. The seismic facies mapping integrated with multi-attribute analysis and conceptual geological modeling proved to be a strong tool for the qualitative estimation of reservoir boundaries during preliminary research. Before the drilling of appraisal wells and 3D seismic survey acqui sition with higher resolution, the Iara Cluster was interpreted as a nonsegmented megastructure defined by a vast four-way closure at the salt base GaffneyCline, 2010 . The continuity of the exploration campaign has shown not only the segmentation of the Iara Complex Petrobras, 2013 but also an interesting hydraulic framework that highlights the existence of a stratigraphic-structural entrapment related to the lateral facies variation of a burial carbonate relief reservoir. From the 11 exploration wells analyzed in this work, which tested the reservoir in virgin condition, 6 reached the water zone, and several irregular OWCs were estimated with great vertical variation up to 200 m . The projection of the maximum values of OWC for each structure reveals that only the Atapu area has the slight possibility of being defined as a four-way closure trap against the salt layers, considering the velocity model uncertainty of 25 m obtained by the depth-seismic cali bration. Even considering the maximum residual of 68 m, the maximum the Sururu and Berbiga o areas are likely hydrothermal sublacustrine springs placed on a relatively distal alkaline lake settings. The best morphological recent analog for those deposits is the Lake Abhe DeMott et al., 2021 and Lake Bogoria Renaut et al., 2013 located in the modern Kenya Rift Valley, as well as the Pyramid Lake Benson, 1994 and Searles Lake Guo and Chafetz, 2012 located in the extensional basin lake of the USA. The Atapu mounds are placed in shallower alkaline lake settings, where the subaerial exposition played an important role. It is identified as terrestrial travertine associated with mound-type and fissure ridge-type deposits in these settings. Recent morphological ana logs for these deposits are the travertine described in Turkey and Italy De Filippis et al., 2012 De Filippis et al., 2013 Brogi et al., 2014 Claes et al., 2017 Mancini et al., 2019 Brogi et al., 2021 . 5.2. 2 reservoir delimitation and pre-salt trapping model The investigation and definition of a trap have a major role in the prospect and play scales evaluation, since it is an essential parameter for the economic assessment and, consequently, the target viability with the available technology and tools at that time Magoon and Dow, 1994 . Thus, the early recognition of the entrapment style, its complexities, and modifications can help de-risk exploration and development campaigns Biddle and Wielchowsky, 1994 . The pre-salt play entrapment style has been defined as a structural trap characterized by a structural four-way closure of the Aptian car bonate reservoir against a thick salt layer Gomes et al., 2012 Carlotto et al., 2017 Abelha and Petersohn, 2019 Zalan and Newman, 2019 . Some authors suggest and highlight the possibility of stratigraphic contribution to those traps in new exploration areas Buckley et al., 2015 Kattah and Balabekov, 2015 Kattah, 2017 . The gas and 18 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Fig. 13. PVT and compositional properties Scatter plots related to gas A Solubility Ratio-Depth cross-plot B CO2 reservoir content in gas phase per depth C C1 reservoir s fluid content per depth D CO2 reservoir content in gas phase per solubility ratio cross-plot E Saturation Pressure-Solubility Ratio cross-plot. Fig. 14. Reservoir fluid compositional analysis clustered by oilfields for the Iara Complex. 19 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Fig. 15. Conceptual geological model for the Iara Cluster, highlighting the potential zones of lateral property variation. surfaces and structural lows can be a powerful tool for estimating the stratigraphic boundaries of carbonate buried relief prospects. When the initial accumulation area estimated by GaffneyCline 2010 is compared to the accumulation area obtained in this study considering the strati graphic boundary 310,22 km2 , a reduction of 55.7 is observed. Furthermore, the Sururu and Berbiga o accumulations echo the discov ery of the Pa o de Ac u car and encourage exploration to look beyond traps associated solely with four-way closures at the Base of Salt and inves tigate stratigraphic and combined traps in the deepest portions of the BVE and MCB settings. structural closure of the Sururu area is 130m above the oil-water con tact. In the Berbiga o area, this relation is even more prominent, almost 200m. Therefore, the stratigraphic framework plays a major role in the lateral stratigraphic entrapment of both areas. As a result, the reservoir s delimitation becomes a challenge, which has a direct impact on the reserve estimation. On the other hand, the conceptual model built from mapping the spatial distribution of the seismic units can qualitatively indicate possible contacts between large-scale domains with the pre dominance of the reservoir and non-reservoir facies. It is important to note that future quantitative interpretation analysis based on seismic inversion, which increases seismic resolution and can be associated with rock properties, could be decisive in consolidating or improving this model. In the northern portion of the Sururu Field, a high-amplitude parallel seismic unit SF-1A of the Upper BVE onlap the low-amplitude unit SF 1B , creating a wedge-shaped feature. This feature is interpreted as the onlap of deep facies over the tight alkaline sublittoral carbonates of the Sururu area, similar to what occurs at the Pa o de Ac u car discovery de Luca et al., 2017 . The occurrence of high amplitude parallel seismic units dominates structural lows, which are characterized by local depocenters associated with graben and hemigrabens features although these features were not drilled in the area by public-domain wells. The well 1-BRSA-886-RJS drilled the flank of a regional depocenter in the Santos Basin and was located 63 m from the Iara Cluster, revealing a predominance of shales along the BVE formation de Freitas et al., 2022 in this setting. In the Berbiga o, the contrast between high-amplitude parallel seismic units SF-1A and mounded patterns SF-2 or low-amplitude parallel seismic units SF 1B is even more pronounced, indicating that the lateral variation of the carbonate facies is possibly even more abrupt, significant, and indicates a greater presence of non-reservoir facies along the platform areas stratigraphic stacking. As a result of these findings, we conclude that seismic pattern con trasts can be used to detect large-scale lateral variation in carbonate facies, depending on the scale of investigation. In particular, identifying high-amplitude plane-parallel seismic units associated with onlap 5.3. Reservoir compartmentalization of Iara Cluster Different causes and processes can trigger the phenomenon of reservoir compartmentalization Jolley et al., 2010 . The primary causes are structural and depositional flow barrier formations, although facies variations, diagenesis, geochemical variation, and non-turbiditic events in siliciclastic systems can also result in reservoir zone dysconnectivity Chen, 2013 . However, identifying and characterizing this phenome non is not an easy task, considering that the analysis of any individual dataset can t reliably predict the compartmentalization of the reservoir Milkov et al., 2007 . This complicating factor stems from the inherent ambiguity in each type of pre-production data s individual interpreta tion. For example, not all faults identified in seismic data are potentially sealants, requiring the analysis of cross-fault flow from the juxtaposition between reservoir and non-reservoir rocks along the fault Jolley et al., 2010 . Similarly, the presence of low permeability rocks in the field can act as vertical flow barriers only if they are laterally extensive and correlatable Smalley and Muggeridge, 2010 . Reservoir pressure can equilibrate over time through a common aquifer Westrich et al., 1999 Milkov et al., 2007 Smalley and Muggeridge, 2010 or a dynamic seal Jolley et al., 2010 . Different oil-water contacts can be the result of a hydrodynamic aquifer Muggeridge and Mamode, 2012 or the perched-water phenomenon, instead of compartmentalization Gaafar et al., 2016 Rolfsva g and Denielsen, 2016 Macaluso et al., 2019 . 20 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Dissimilarities in fluid properties can arise from petroleum charge his tories Peters and Fowler, 2002 Milkov et al., 2007 Smalley and Muggeridge, 2010 or post-accumulation processes such as thermal degradation Peters and Fowler, 2002 Isaksen, 2004 , biodegradation Peters and Fowler, 2002 Milkov et al., 2007 Smalley and Muggeridge, 2010 and gravitational segregation Peters and Fowler, 2002 Milkov et al., 2007 Pomerantz et al., 2010 . Therefore, the best approach to reducing uncertainty when addressing the reservoir connectivity issue is through data integration, which can be interpreted in terms of risk as proposed by Milkov et al. 2007 . The reservoir compartmentalization matrix generated for the Iara Cluster is shown in Table 4. The complex tectonostratigraphic history in the Iara Cluster is characterized by indications of hydrothermal vents in the formation of the reservoirs, tectono-structural influence on the deposition of car bonates, lateral facies variation associated with the transition from a shallow alkaline lake setting to a distal lacustrine environment, and posterior reactivation of the structural framework Fig. 14 . This complexity contributes to the heterogeneity and abrupt contrast of permo-porous properties in the reservoir. The scenario is prone to the formation of regional and local static or dynamic seals that affect hy draulic communication between reservoirs. The high heterogeneity of these reservoirs also reflects the sharp contrast of the productivity index in the wells within the Berbiga o, Sururu and Atapu structures, with an emphasis on the occurrence of the highest indexes when associated with mound features or areas with reworked evidence. The main potential permeability barriers identified in the Iara Cluster were faults and fractures with a high density of occurrence, primarily in the Sururu and Atapu areas the Jiquia shale, a significant vertical permeability barrier identified in almost all wells and clearly identified in gamma-ray and NMR porosity logs lateral facies variations in the upper Barra Velha system, estimated by the abrupt contrast be tween the high amplitude plane-parallel seismic facies SF-1A and the others particularly the carbonate mound unit the occurrence of filling seismic features SF-5 , and in the hanging wall of syn-depositional reactivated faults. Therefore, the occurrence of those features in the seismic data between the wells analyzed, increases the risk of reservoir compartmentalization Table 4 . The analysis of pre-production reservoir pressure indicates hydraulic communication of the oil zone between the Atapu and Sururu reservoirs, whose gradients are compatible with each other respectively, 0,0777 and 0,0785 kgf cm2 Fig. 11 . Berbiga o area presents two different oil gradients 0,0809 and 0,0989 kgf cm2 Fig. 11 . The first is slightly similar to those identified in the Sururu and Atapu accumulations, while the second is observed in a more distal-setting structure, distinctly hy draulically segmented from the others. The density estimated from the oil gradient of the 3-BRSA-1032-RJS well presents values above the expected, this result may be influenced by overpressured sampling points. We observed irregular oil-water contacts and free water levels along and between the reservoirs, some of which are associated with the same oil zone. In static pressure by depth graphs Fig. 16 , the water gradient line occurs parallel with a vertical shift related to the same oil zone. This pattern not only occurs in the Iara Complex, but also in the Mero Petersohn et al., 2021 and Tupi fields Mello et al., 2021b . This arrangement can indicate the phenomenon of the perched-water effect in the studied reservoirs. It is defined as movable water above the transition zone that is not directly connected to the actual free-water table of a given hydrocarbon column due to the local entrapment of connate water that forces the water to move vertically through the layer Gaafar et al., 2016 Rolfsva g and Denielsen, 2016 Macaluso et al., 2019 . Therefore, this effect is prone to occur when associated with rugged relief of the reservoir base Rolfsva g and Denielsen, 2016 , characteristic of buried-relief reservoirs, and in carbonate mounds due to the influence of tight impermeable carbonate zones, resulting from the depositional environment and diagenesis processes Gaafar et al., 2016 . Both situations are distinctly observed in the Iara Cluster Fig. 16 , not only in the hydrothermal mound alignments but also in the platform settings, which can entrap the water during the drainage pro cess, causing the occurrence of the perched-water contacts. However, the high density of faults observed in Atapu Fig. 16 together with the presence of the Jiquia shale vertically separating the reservoirs of the Itapema and Barra Velha formations makes this phenomenon more susceptible in the area. Furthermore, the distal context observed in Berbiga o Fig. 16 , with strong permo-porosity contrasts along the BVE Table 4 Risk Matrix for the occurrence of compartmentalization inspired by Milkov et al., 2007 . Note that the level of dissimilarity between wells is directly proportional to the risk of reservoir segmentation. 21 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Fig. 16. Conceptual geological model of the reservoir compartments of the Iara Complex A Map of the base of salt containing the stratigraphic-structural boundaries of the reservoir as well as the possible permeability barriers B Segmentation style observed in the study area Atapu Style, hydraulic communication throughout all the oil zone with vertical oil composition pool segmentation in the 3-BRSA-1172-RJS due to the Jiquia shale permeability barrier the perched-water effect is observed forming shifted parallel water gradients. Berbiga o Style, hydraulic compartmentalization between oil zones due to stratigraphic lateral variations, resulting in different oil gradients. reservoir, also results in a considerable risk of this phenomenon occurring. The oil component analysis, mainly related to the gas associated with the single liquid hydrocarbon phase of those subsaturated reservoirs, indicates important differences between the studied areas Figs. 13 and 14 . The reservoir connectivity risk factor is directly proportional to the degree of similarity between the compositions of the fluids sampled in different wells Table 4 . The API degree of the oils sampled has similar values in the three areas, with the exception of punctual samples from the Berbiga o and Sururu fields Fig. 12 . The Sururu area shows an increase in API degree values by depth, indicating the presence of a compositional gradient of the oil column by gravitational separation. Locally, the same phenom enon possibly occurs in well 4-BRSA-1226-RJS in the southern portion of Berbiga o. Because sample dissimilarity is related to the same composi tional gradient, the post-accumulation process of gravitational separa tion makes direct comparison of fluid samples difficult regarding compartmentalization identification. The Atapu accumulation presents the highest saturation pressure values of the reservoir, whereas Sururu presents intermediate values, and Berbiga o presents the lowest values. The saturation pressure is directly proportional to the solubility ratio, thus resulting in a similar distribution of these properties. There is a correlation between the values of the solubility ratio and the content of CO2 and C1 diluted in the reservoir. Therefore, the Berbiga o contrasts with the other reservoirs, presenting much lower levels of CO2 contamination in relation to the Sururu and Atapu accumulations. Internally in Berbiga o, slight differences are observed between the oil obtained from well 3-BRSA-1032-RJS, which was drilled into a structure in a more distal context, and the oil obtained from the main structure. The oil in the main structure presents higher values of the properties studied, while its southern portion presents a possible compositional gradient. In Atapu, an oil sample extracted from the Ita pema Formation reservoir is distinctly different from the others. The well log analysis shows the presence of a vertical permeability barrier above this reservoir, characterized by the radioactive shale Jiquia , which may be segmenting the different oil pools. The differences in oil composition observed in the Iara Complex reservoirs are interpreted as a result of different petroleum charge his tories and post-accumulation processes. De Freitas et al. 2022 when analyzing organic geochemical data from ten crude oil samples from the Santos Basin, observed through the analysis of conventional biomarker source-related parameters that the oil sampled from well 3-BRSA-1172-RJS Atapu location is quite similar to the 1-BRSA-618-RJS Sururu location oil sample. This oil family indicates lacustrine freshwater to sub-normal salinity conditions for the source rock de Farias et al., 2021 which is interpreted as belonging to the Itapema formation mainly Rocha et al., 2019 slight differences can be the result of distinct facies of the same formation due to salinity con dition variations Leite et al., 2020 de Freitas et al., 2022 . The analysis of gas geochemistry proved to be a powerful tool for understanding the generation process, thermal maturity, and secondary alteration processes, which provides inputs to reconstruct the reservoir accumulation history Lorant et al., 1998 Prinzhofer et al., 2000 Katz, 2002 Santos Neto, 2004 Milkov and Etiope, 2018 Peng et al., 2019 Souza et al., 2022 . The use of simple ratios of the molecular composi tion of gas C1 C2, C2 C3, C2 iC4, iC4 nC4 integrated with isotopic ra tios 13C and 2H can be used as a proxy for maturity estimation Lorant et al., 1998 Katz, 2002 Prinzhofer et al., 2000 Peng et al., 2019 Souza et al., 2021 . The molecular and stable isotopic composition of the associated hydrocarbon analyzed in this study suggests a thermogenic origin. The methane origin diagrams based on 13C C1 versus 2H C1 and C1 C2 C3 of Milkov and Etiope 2018 support the interpretation of oil-associated thermogenic gas related to the transition from an early to late maturation stage Fig. 17 A and B . The range of those properties analyzed in this study is consistent with the samples analyzed by Souza et al. 2021 . The Iara Complex samples show a clear trend of increasing maturity, with the Berbiga o reservoir samples more closely related to the early mature thermogenic gas stage and the Sururu and Atapu samples more closely related to the late mature thermogenic gas stage. The same trend is observed in the scatter plot of C2 C3 versus C2 iC4 Fig. 17C for the Iara Complex samples based on Peng et al. 2019 . This suggests that the oil kitchen that fed the Berbiga o reservoirs had less thermal maturity than the Sururu and Atapu kitchen. The permeability barrier, characterized by an extensive NE SW graben located in the east of Berbiga o, presents very high efficiency, preventing the homogeniza tion and mixing of fluids between the reservoirs over geological time. Sururu and Atapu reservoirs may have shared the same oil kitchen. Understanding the timing of the reservoir s CO2 contamination is 22 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Fig. 17. Panels A and B are genetic diagrams for hydrocarbon gas source classification Milkov and Etiope, 2018 for the associated gas samples from Berbiga o in orange , Sururu in grey , and Atapu in blue . Panel C is a maturity proxy diagram based on Peng et al. 2019 . A 13CC1 versus 2HC1 plot CR CO2 reduction F methyl 371 type fermentation SM secondary microbial OA oil-associated thermogenic gas EMT early mature thermogenic gas LMT late mature thermogenic gas B C1 C2 C3 versus 13CC1 The symbols are the same for the panel A C C2 C3 versus C2 iC4. critical for reconstructing the trap-filling history of the Santos Basin presalt accumulations. Santos Neto et al. 2012 and Ferraz et al. 2019 proposed a mantle origin for CO2 based on the integration of the mo lecular and isotopic compositions of CO2 and noble gasses. However, other possibilities, such as contact metamorphism in carbonate rock due to igneous intrusion, are still in debate and require further investigation de Freitas et al., 2021 Souza et al., 2022 . The spatial distribution of CO2 contamination contents indicates that the deep-seated fault setting associated with crustal hyperextended domains in the outer portions of the Santos Basin are the main pathways for the ascension of mantle-derived material and, consequently, for the migration of CO2 Gamboa et al., 2019 Ferraz et al., 2019 de Freitas et al., 2022 the presence of spatial outliers of CO2 contamination in regions with a known expressive igneous occurrence supports other possible abiotic mechanisms of this component s generation de Freitas et al., 2022 . Considering that some depositional models for the Barra Velha for mation rely on CO2 degassing in the palaeolake and the chemical reactions that result Wright, 2022 , it appears that fluids enriched in this compound have been present in the system since the reservoir s formation. Structural reactivation and igneous events in the basin can act as triggers for new pulses of CO2-enriched fluid generation and up welling migration. New pulses of CO2 input in previously filled traps can cause partial or even total oil displacement Huang et al., 2015 de Freitas et al., 2022 . The further deep CO2-rich fluids input can also change the geochemical characteristics of the crude oil present in the reservoir due to the heat, and also the extraction of small saturated hydrocarbons which can be carried over long distances Liu et al., 2017 . The southern Berbiga o samples analyzed in this study show a clear decrease in C1 and C2 content with increasing CO2 content, while C3 C5 content increases with CO2 contamination Fig. 18 . This pattern results in a decrease in dryness when there is such contamination. The Sururu samples exhibit a clear decrease in C1 C5 content with increasing CO2, resulting in a relative increase in dryness because the decay of C2 C5 is greater than that of C1 Fig. 18 . The decrease in such components as a 23 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Fig. 18. Relationship between CO2 and gas component content. The first scatter plot represents the dryness, while the others depict the relationships between the individual gas components and the CO2 contamination content. result of contamination is indicative of the phenomenon of hydrocarbon light fraction displacement caused by CO2 flooding of these reservoirs. The CO2 content of the Berbiga o reservoirs is strikingly lower than that of the Sururu and Atapu reservoirs Fig. 13B Fig. 17D . This sug gests that these structures do not share the same migration pathways of fluids enriched in this component. The Berbiga o reservoirs are located in a NE-SW structural trend hemigrabens system in the center of a crustal resistate domain Zalan and Newman, 2019 de Freitas et al., 2022 . This scenario is unlikely for the ascent of mantle-derived fluids due to the large crustal thickness. The Gato do Mato accumulation shares the same structural settings as Berbiga o and also does not present high levels of CO2 de Freitas et al., 2022 . Conversely, the Sururu and Atapu reser voirs have a higher density of faults and are located in the rotated continuation of the structural trends of Se pia and Jupiter, respectively, which are situated in the transition from a crustal resistate domain to a thin crust Zalan and Newman, 2019 de Freitas et al., 2022 . This external context is more favorable for the contribution of mantle-derived fluids and, consequently, CO2 contamination. The cor relation between the increase in dryness and the CO2 content in the Sururu and Atapu samples Fig. 17D could be an indication of the small saturated hydrocarbon displacement caused by the carbon dioxide migration into these structures. Furthermore, the lack of homogeniza tion of CO2 content along the Iara Complex reservoirs indicates the ef ficiency of reservoir compartmentalization via the permeability barriers observed mainly between Berbiga o and other oilfields Fig. 16 . Therefore, when considering the observations discussed, in sum mary, we observed that there are at least four possible reservoir seg ments in the study area two in Berbiga o, one in Sururu, and the other in 24 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Atapu. The similarity between the pressure gradients of the oil zone between the three main structures may be indicative of the presence of dynamic seals between the structures that allowed their homogenization over geological time. The barrier between Atapu and Sururu appears to have been less effective, allowing a more similar signature of oil composition, or both structures were filled by fluid of similar composi tion, which underwent gravitational separation in the Sururu area. Regarding the evolution of the exploratory campaign in the region, the Berbiga o and Sururu areas present the greatest risk of compart mentalization of the reservoir, mainly due to the geological context of these areas, which are more susceptible to the presence of stratigraphicstructural permeability barriers and baffles. Meanwhile, the perchedwater phenomenon is susceptible in all areas studied, but presents the greatest risk in Atapu due to the abundant presence of faults in the lo cality associated with the existence of Jiquia shale vertical permeability barriers. between Berbiga o B and the others. Reservoir pressure equilibration through a dynamic seal or by a regional aquifer can explain the proximity of the gradients from Sururu and Atapu. The PVT prop erties and composition of oil samples indicate important and pro found differences between the three oilfields, and evidence of oil compositional gradient in Sururu and potentially in South Berbiga o A 4-BRSA-1226-RJS . The basic gas geochemistry analysis indicates the oil-associated thermogenic origin of the associated gas from those undersaturated reservoirs. A trend of maturity increasing is well defined in the sample studied, indicating that the source kitchen that fed Berbiga o was in earlier stages of maturation than Sururu and Atapu. In addi tion, different CO2 contamination content is observed between those areas, indicating the contribution of different migration pathways for the ascension of CO2-enriched fluids or different sources. The decrease in the content of light oil fractions with increasing CO2 content in the Sururu and Berbiga o samples is indicative of oil displacement due to CO2 flooding. 6. Conclusion Therefore, our study highlights the importance of conducting a thorough integrated analysis to gain a better understanding of pre-salt reservoir connectivity and other effects of heterogeneities such as the perched-water phenomenon. This analysis can contribute to predicting the reservoir behavior of other appraisal assets, preventing reserve misestimation and possible unforeseen events during the production phase. Furthermore, our findings illustrate the effects of lateral reservoir quality obliteration on trap delimitation and how to infer them using seismic facies identification, which can help with reservoir and trap derisking in new prospect evaluations. This study presents a multi-proxy analysis to raise and address the impacts of vertical and lateral heterogeneities in pre-salt carbonate reservoirs, in particular, the evaluation of reservoir compartmentaliza tion and the perched-water effect. The conclusions drawn from this analysis are. A complex tectonostratigraphic history is observed in the study area, with indications of syn-tectonic influence during the deposition of lower and upper Barra Velha formation and the role of hydrothermal vents in the reservoir formation from the Intra-Alagoas unconfor mity. This history contributed to the formation of heterogeneity in the reservoir and abrupt contrasts in permeability through not only a high density of faults but also carbonate facies variation. The seismic facies mapping integrated with structural interpretation, seismic attribute analysis, and consecutively conceptual geological modeling proved to be a strong tool for qualitative inference of reservoir boundaries. The high amplitude parallel seismic facies SF1 are interpreted as a response to the predominance of relatively deeper lacustrine carbonate settings deposits with lower reservoir quality, this unit usually transitions to low amplitude parallel seismic facies SF 1B and mounded seismic facies SF-2 through an onlap surface that forms a slope front fill seismic pattern SF-5 or abruptly by faults. Therefore, the occurrence of SF-5 is a strategic pattern to estimate and calibrate the stratigraphic reservoir boundary. Irregular oil-water contacts were identified throughout the oilfields studied, between them and internally, the variation reaches 149 m between Atapu and Sururu. Internal variations, mainly in Atapu and Berbiga o A, are interpreted as the result of the perched-water effect while external variations with high values are interpreted as a possible effect of reservoir compartmentalization. The Iara oilfields are defined by stratigraphic-structural trapping related to the combination of the lateral variation of burial carbonate relief reservoir facies with the complex fault framework. The best trap analog for those fields is the carbonate mound-related Pa o de Ac u car pre-salt reservoir in the Campos basin. The stratigraphic component limits the area of the Sururu and Berbiga o reservoirs mostly but guarantees a significant increase in structural relief and, consequently, gross pay. In addition, the Jiquia shale is an important vertical permeability barrier between the BVE carbonates and the ITP coquinas, which compartmentalizes oil pools in central Atapu 3BRSA-1172-RJS . The degree of dissimilarity between reservoir pressure, the PVT properties and the composition of the oils sampled in the wells is directly proportional to the risk of reservoir compartmentalization. The analysis of virgin reservoir static pressure pointed out similar ities between the oil gradient from Atapu and Sururu, a slight dif ference between Berbiga o A and the rest, and an abrupt difference Funding sources This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Data availability The authors do not have permission to share data. Acknowledgements The authors are grateful to the Age ncia Nacional de Petro leo, Ga s Natural e Biocombusti vies ANP for providing seismic and well data, as well as Schlumberger for the software license. The authors are grateful to the Instituto Nacional de Cie ncia e Tecnologia de Geofi sica do Pet ro leo INCT-GP CNPq , Brazil Fundac a o Carlos Chagas Filho de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado do Rio de Janeiro FAPERJ , Brazil and the Coordenac a o de Aperfeic oamento de Pessoal de Ni vel Superior CAPES , Brazil for supporting this research. We thank Lucio Prevatti and Diego Gracioso from Shell Brazil for their interest and technical contributions during the idealization and execution of the analyses in this study. We are also grateful to Dr. Dunlap and Dr. Mohriak for dedicating time to improve this manuscript with constructive comments. References Abelha, M., Petersohn, E., 2019. The State of the Art of the Brazilian Pre-salt Exploration. AAPG Prospect and Property Expo, London, United Kingdom. Conference Abstract. https www.searchanddiscovery.com documents 2018 30586abelha ndx abelha. pdf. 25 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Ahmed, T., 2006. Reservoir Engineering Handbook. Gulf Professional Publishing. Alvarenga, R.S., Iacopini, D., Kuchle, J., Scherer, C.M.S., Goldberg, K., 2016. Seismic characteristics and distribution of hydrothermal vent complexes in the Cretaceous offshore rift section of the Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 74, 12 25. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2016.03.030. Alves, T.M., Fetter, M., Lima, C., Cartwright, J.A., Cosgrove, J., Ganga , A., Queiroz, L., Strugale, M., 2017. An incomplete correlation between pre-salt topography, top reservoir erosion, and salt deformation in deep-water Santos Basin SE Brazil . Mar. Petrol. Geol. 79, 300 320. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2016.10.015. Azere do, A.C., Duarte, L.V., Silva, A.P., 2021. The challenging carbonates from the PreSalt reservoirs offshore Brazil facies, palaeoenvironment and diagenesis. J. South Am. Earth Sci. 108, 103202 https doi.org 10.1016 j.jsames.2021.103202. Barnett, A.J., Obermaier, M., Amthor, J., Sharafodin, M., Bolton, M., Clarke, D., Camara, R., 2021a. Chapter 6 origin and significance of thick carbonate grainstone packages in nonmarine successions a case study from the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazil. In Memoir 124 the Supergiant Lower Cretaceous Pre-salt Petroleum Systems of the Santos Basin, Brazil. AAPG, pp. 155 174. https doi.org 10.1306 13722318MSB.6.1853. Barnett, A.J., Fu, L., Rapasi, T., Scotellaro, C., Guha, J., Cabolova, A., Domingues, A.L., 2021b. Seismic characterization and origin of clinoforms in lacustrine depositional environments a case study from the Cretaceous of the South Atlantic. Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ. 509, 127 145. https doi.org 10.1144 SP509-2019-148. Belhouchet, H.E., Benzagouta, M.S., Dobbi, A., Mazouz, E., Achi, N., Duplay, J., Khodja, M., 2021. Reservoir compartmentalization and fluid property determination using a modular dynamic tester MDT case study of an Algerian oil field. EuroMediterranean J. Environ. Integr. 6, 15. https doi.org 10.1007 s41207-02000216-5. Benson, L., 1994. Carbonate deposition, Pyramid Lake subbasin, Nevada 1. Sequence of formation and elevational distribution of carbonate deposits Tufas . Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 109, 55 87. https doi.org 10.1016 0031-0182 94 90118-X. Biddle, K.T., Wielchowsky, C.C., 1994. Hydrocarbon Traps Chapter 13 Part III. Processes. Brogi, A., Capezzuoli, E., Alc ic ek, M.C., Gandin, A., 2014. Evolution of a fault-controlled fissure-ridge type travertine deposit in the western Anatolia extensional province the C ukurbag fissure-ridge Pamukkale, Turkey . J. Geol. Soc. London. 171, 425 441. https doi.org 10.1144 jgs2013-034. Brogi, A., Capezzuoli, E., Karabacak, V., Alcicek, M.C., Luo, L., 2021. Fissure ridges a reappraisal of faulting and travertine deposition travitonics . Geosciences 11, 278. https doi.org 10.3390 geosciences11070278. Buckley, J.P., Bosence, D., Elders, C., 2015. Tectonic setting and stratigraphic architecture of an early cretaceous lacustrine carbonate platform, sugar loaf high, Santos Basin, Brazil. Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ. 418, 175 191. https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.13. Carlotto, M.A., da Silva, R.C.B., Yamato, A.A., Trindade, W.L., Moreira, J.L.P., Fernandes, R.A.R., Ribeiro, O.J.S., Gouveia, W.P., Carminati, J.P., Qicai, D., Junfeng, Z., da Silva-Telles, A.C., 2017. Libra a newborn giant in the Brazilian presalt province. In Giant Fields of the Decade 2000 2010. The American Association of Petroleum Geologists. https doi.org 10.1306 13572006M1133685. Ceraldi, T.S., Grenn, D., 2017. Evolution of the South Atlantic lacustrine deposits in response to Early Cretaceous rifting, subsidence and lake hydrology. Geological Society, London, Special Publications 438, 77 98. https doi.org 10.1144 sp438.10. Chafetz, H., Barth, J., Cook, M., Guo, X., Zhou, J., 2018. Origins of carbonate spherulites implications for Brazilian Aptian pre-salt reservoir. Sediment. Geol. 365, 21 33. https doi.org 10.1016 j.sedgeo.2017.12.024. Chen, J., 2013. Deepwater reservoir compartmentalization causes, impacts on production, and methods of identification. In All Days. OTC. https doi.org 10.4043 23951-MS. Claes, H., Marques Erthal, M., Soete, J., O zkul, M., Swennen, R., 2017. Shrub and pore type classification petrography of travertine shrubs from the Ball k-Belevi area Denizli, SW Turkey . Quat. Int. 437, 147 163. https doi.org 10.1016 j. quaint.2016.11.002. de Carvalho, M.D., Fernandes, F.L., 2021. Chapter 5 pre-salt depositional system sedimentology, diagenesis, and reservoir quality of the Barra Velha Formation, as a result of the Santos Basin tectono-stratigraphic development. In Memoir 124 the Supergiant Lower Cretaceous Pre-salt Petroleum Systems of the Santos Basin, Brazil. AAPG, pp. 121 154. https doi.org 10.1306 13732337MSB.5.1708. De Filippis, L., Billi, A., 2012. Morphotectonics of fissure ridge travertines from geothermal areas of Mammoth Hot Springs Wyoming and Bridgeport California . Tectonophysics 548 549, 34 48. https doi.org 10.1016 j.tecto.2012.04.017. De Filippis, L., Faccenna, C., Billi, A., Anzalone, E., Brilli, M., Ozkul, M., Soligo, M., Tuccimei, P., Villa, I.M., 2012. Growth of fissure ridge travertines from geothermal springs of Denizli Basin, western Turkey. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull. 124, 1629 1645. https doi.org 10.1130 B30606.1. De Filippis, L., Anzalone, E., Billi, A., Faccenna, C., Poncia, P.P., Sella, P., 2013. The origin and growth of a recently-active fissure ridge travertine over a seismic fault, Tivoli, Italy. Geomorphology 195, 13 26. https doi.org 10.1016 j. geomorph.2013.04.019. de Freitas, V.A., Vital, J.C., dos, S., Rodrigues, B.R., Rodrigues, R., 2022. Source rock potential, main depocenters, and CO2 occurrence in the pre-salt section of Santos Basin, southeast Brazil. J. South Am. Earth Sci. 115, 103760 https doi.org 10.1016 j.jsames.2022.103760. de Luca, P.H.V., Matias, H., Carballo, J., Sineva, D., Pimentel, G.A., Tritlla, J., Esteban, M., Loma, R., Alonso, J.L.A., Jime nez, R.P., Pontet, M., Martinez, P.B., Vega, V., 2017. Breaking barriers and paradigms in presalt exploration the Pa o de Ac u car discovery offshore Brazil . In Giant Fields of the Decade 2000 2010. The American Association of Petroleum Geologists. https doi.org 10.1306 13572007M1133686. Dehler, N.M., Magnavita, L.P., Gomes, L.C., Rigoti, C.A., de Oliveira, J.A.B., Sant Anna, M.V., da Costa, F.G.D., 2016. The Helmut geophysical anomaly a regional left-lateral transtensional shear zone system connecting Santos and Campos basins, southeastern Brazil. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 72, 412 422. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2016.01.012. DeMott, L.M., Scholz, C.A., Awaleh, M.O., 2021. Lacustrine carbonate towers of Lake Abhe, Djibouti interplay of hydrologic and microbial processes. Sediment. Geol. 424, 105983 https doi.org 10.1016 j.sedgeo.2021.105983. Dolson, J., He, Z., Horn, B.W., 2018. Advances and perspectives on stratigraphic trap exploration-making the subtle trap obvious. Search and discovery article 60054 2018 . In AAPG 2017 Middle East Region Geosciences Technology Workshop, Stratigraphic Traps of the Middle East. Muscat, Oman, p. 67. December 11-13, 2017. Edman, J.D., Burk, M.K., 1999. Geochemistry in an integrated study of reservoir compartmentalization at ewing bank 873, offshore gulf of Mexico. SPE Reservoir Eval. Eng. 2, 520 526. https doi.org 10.2118 57470-PA. Farias, F., Szatmari, P., Bahniuk, A., Franc a, A.B., 2019. Evaporitic carbonates in the presalt of Santos Basin genesis and tectonic implications. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 105, 251 272. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2019.04.020. Ferraz, A., Gamboa, L., Neto, E.V., dos, S., Baptista, R., 2019. Crustal structure and CO 2 occurrences in the Brazilian basins. Interpretation 7, SL37 SL45. https doi.org 10.1190 INT-2019-0038.1. Ferreira, D.J.A., Lupinacci, W.M., de Andrade Neves, I., Zambrini, J.P.R., Ferrari, A.L., Gamboa, L.A.P., Azul, M.O., 2019. Unsupervised seismic facies classification applied to a presalt carbonate reservoir, Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Bull. 103, 997 1012. https doi.org 10.1306 10261818055. Ferreira, D.J.A., Dutra, H.P.L., de Castro, T.M., Lupinacci, W.M., 2021. Geological process modeling and geostatistics for facies reconstruction of presalt carbonates. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 124, 104828 https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2020.104828. Fetter, M., Penteado, H., Madrucci, V., Spadini, A., 2018. The Palaeogeography of the Lacustrine Rift System of the Pre-salt in Santos Basin, Offshore Brazil. AAPG Annual Convention Exhibition 2018, Salt Lake City, Utah. Fox, R.J., Bowman, M.B.J., 2010. The challenges and impact of compartmentalization in reservoir appraisal and development. Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ. 347, 9 23. https doi.org 10.1144 SP347.2. Gaafar, G.R., Altunbay, M.M., Aziz, S.B.A., 2016. Perched-water, the concept and its effects on exploration and field development plans in sandstone and carbonate reservoirs. In Day 4 Fri. https doi.org 10.4043 26653-MS. March 25, 2016. OTC. Gaffney, Cline Associates, 2010. Review and Evaluation of Ten Selected Discoveries and Prospects in the Pre-salt Play of the Deepwater Santos Basin, Brazil, CG JW RLG C1820.00 GCABA.1914, ANP, September 15th access date August 15, 2022 . http docplayer.net 16153643-Review-and-evaluation-of-ten-selected-discoverie s-and-prospects-in-the-pre-salt-play-of-the-deepwater-santos-basin-brazil.html. Gamboa, L., Ferraz, A., Baptista, R., Neto, E.V.S., 2019. Geotectonic controls on CO2 Formation and distribution processes in the Brazilian pre-salt basins. Geosciences 9, 252. https doi.org 10.3390 geosciences9060252. Gill, C.E., Shepherd, M., Millington, J.J., 2010. Compartmentalization of the Nelson field, Central North Sea evidence from produced water chemistry analysis. Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ. 347, 71 87. https doi.org 10.1144 SP347.6. Gomes, P.O., Kilsdonk, B., Grow, T., Minken, J., Barragan, R., 2012. Tectonic evolution of the outer high of Santos Basin, southern sa o paulo plateau, Brazil, and implications for hydrocarbon exploration. In Tectonics and Sedimentation. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa, Oklahoma, pp. 125 142. https doi.org 10.1306 13351550M1003530. Gomes, J.P., Bunevich, R.B., Tedeschi, L.R., Tucker, M.E., Whitaker, F.F., 2020. Facies classification and patterns of lacustrine carbonate deposition of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazilian pre-salt. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 113, 104176 https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2019.104176. Guo, X., Chafetz, H.S., 2012. Large tufa mounds, Searles lake, California. Sedimentology 59 5 , 1509 1535. https doi.org 10.1111 j.1365-3091.2011.01315.x. Hansen, D.M., 2006. The morphology of intrusion-related vent structures and their implications for constraining the timing of intrusive events along the NE Atlantic margin. J. Geol. Soc. London. 163, 789 800. https doi.org 10.1144 001676492004-167. Heine, C., Zoethout, J., Mu ller, R.D., 2013. Kinematics of the South Atlantic rift. Solid Earth 4, 215 253. https doi.org 10.5194 se-4-215-2013. Herlinger, R., Zambonato, E.E., De Ros, L.F., 2017. Influence of diagenesis on the quality of lower cretaceous pre-salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs from northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. J. Sediment. Res. 87, 1285 1313. https doi.org 10.2110 jsr.2017.70. Huang, B., Tian, H., Huang, H., Yang, J., Xiao, X., Li, L., 2015. Origin and accumulation of CO2 and its natural displacement of oils in the continental margin basins, northern South China Sea. AAPG Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull. 99 7 , 1349 1369. https doi.org 10.1306 02091514125. Isaksen, G.H., 2004. Central North Sea hydrocarbon systems generation, migration, entrapment, and thermal degradation of oil and gas. Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Bull. 88, 1545 1572. https doi.org 10.1306 06300403048. Jolley, S.J., Fisher, Q.J., Ainsworth, R.B., 2010. Reservoir compartmentalization an introduction. Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ. 347, 1 8. https doi.org 10.1144 SP347.1. Jones, B., Renaut, R.W., 2010. In Alonso-Zarza, A.M., Lawrence, Taner Eds. , Calcareous Spring Deposits in Continental Settings in Carbonates in Continental Settings. Facies, Environments, and Processes, Development in Sedimentology, vol. 61, pp. 177 204. https doi.org 10.1016 S0070-4571 09 06104-4. 26 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 Kattah, S., 2017. Exploration opportunities in the pre-salt play, deepwater Campos Basin, Brazil. Sediment. Rec 15 1 , 4 8. https doi.org 10.2110 sedred.2017.1. Kattah, S., Balabekov, Y., 2015. Seismic facies geometries of the pre-salt limestone units and newly-identified exploration trends within the Santos and Campos basins, Brazil. In 14th International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society EXPOGEF, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 3-6 August 2015. Brazilian Geophysical Society, pp. 288 293. https doi.org 10.1190 sbgf2015-057. Katz, B.J., 2002. Gas geochemistry a key to understanding formation and alteration processes. In Proceedings, Indonesian Petroleum Association Twenty-Eighth Annual Convention Exhibition, 1, pp. 789 802. October 2001. Leite, C.O.N., Silva, C.M.A., De Ros, L.F., 2020. Depositional and diagenetic processes in the pre-salt rift section of a Santos Basin area, SE Brazil. J. Sediment. Res. 90, 584 608. https doi.org 10.2110 jsr.2020.27. Lima, B.E.M., De Ros, L.F., 2019. Deposition, diagenetic and hydrothermal processes in the Aptian Pre-Salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs of the northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Sediment. Geol. 383, 55 81. https doi.org 10.1016 j. sedgeo.2019.01.006. Lima, B.E.M., Tedeschi, L.R., Pestilho, A.L.S., Santos, R.V., Vazquez, J.C., Guzzo, J.V.P., De Ros, L.F., 2020. Deep-burial hydrothermal alteration of the Pre-Salt carbonate reservoirs from northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil evidence from petrography, fluid inclusions, Sr, C and O isotopes. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 113, 104143 https doi. org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2019.104143. Liu, Q., Zhu, D., Jin, Z., Meng, Q., Wu, X., Yu, H., 2017. Effects of deep CO 2 on petroleum and thermal alteration the case of the Huangqiao oil and gas field. Chem. Geol. 469, 214 229. https doi.org 10.1016 j.chemgeo.2017.06.031. Lorant, F., Prinzhofer, A., Behar, F., Huc, A.-Y., 1998. Carbon isotopic and molecular constraints on the formation and the expulsion of thermogenic hydrocarbon gases. Chem. Geol. 147, 249 264. https doi.org 10.1016 S0009-2541 98 00017-5. Macaluso, D., Colombi, N., Castelnuovo, L., Calderoni, M., Prevosti, P.B., 2019. Perched water - identification and production behavior in A real case. In Day 3 Thu, September 19, 2019. SPE. https doi.org 10.2118 196635-MS. Magoon, L.B., Dow, W.G., 1994. The petroleum system. In Magoon, L.B., Dow, W.G. Eds. , The Petroleum SystemdFrom Source to Trap, vol. 60. AAPG Memoir, pp. 3 24. Mancini, A., Capezzuoli, E., Erthal, M., Swennen, R., 2019. Hierarchical approach to define travertine depositional systems 3D conceptual morphological model and possible applications. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 103, 549 563. https doi.org 10.1016 j. marpetgeo.2019.02.021. Matos, R.M.D. de, Fernandes, F., Norton, I., Fetter, M., 2021. Oblique core-complex type detachment systems in the Santos Basin. SSRN Electron. J. https doi.org 10.2139 ssrn.3985363. McKie, T., Jolley, S.J., Kristensen, M.B., 2010. Stratigraphic and structural compartmentalization of dryland fluvial reservoirs triassic heron cluster, central north sea. Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ. 347, 165 198. https doi.org 10.1144 SP347.11. Meisling, K.E., Cobbold, P.R., Mount, V.S., 2001. Segmentation of an obliquely rifted margin, Campos and Santos basins, southeastern Brazil. Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Bull. 85 https doi.org 10.1306 8626D0A9-173B-11D7-8645000102C1865D. Mello, M.R., Peres, W., Rostirolla, S., Pedrosa Jr., O., Piquet, A., Becker, S., Yilmaz, P., 2021a. The Santos Basin pre-salt super giant petroleum system an incredible journey from failure to success. In Mello, Marcio R., Yilmaz, Pinar O., Katz, Barry J. Eds. , The Supergiant Lower Cretaceous Pre-salt Petroleum Systems of the Santos Basin, Brazil AAPG Memoir 124, pp. 1 34. Mello, M.R., Rostirolla, S.P., Peres, W., Pedrosa Jr., O.A., Carvalho, M.D., Cardoso Netto, A., 2021b. Tupi field the largest oil producer in the South atlantic realm, Santos Basin, Brazil. In Mello, Marcio R., Yilmaz, Pinar O., Katz, Barry J. Eds. , The Supergiant Lower Cretaceous Pre-salt Petroleum Systems of the Santos Basin, Brazil AAPG Memoir 124, pp. 395 430. Milani, E.J., Oliveira, J.A.B., Dias, J.L., Szatmari, P., Cupertino, J.A., 2005. Basement control on structural styles and sediment pathways of southeast Brazil atlantic margin basins Brazil deep seds deep-water sedimentation in the southeast Brazilian margin project . In Proceedings of AAPG International Conference and Exhibition Paris, France . Milkov, A.V., Etiope, G., 2018. Revised genetic diagrams for natural gases based on a global dataset of 20,000 samples. Org. Geochem. 125, 109 120. https doi.org 10.1016 j.orggeochem.2018.09.002. Milkov, A.V., Goebel, E., Dzou, L., Fisher, D.A., Kutch, A., McCaslin, N., Bergman, D.F., 2007. Compartmentalization and time-lapse geochemical reservoir surveillance of the Horn Mountain oil field, deep-water Gulf of Mexico. Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Bull. 91, 847 876. https doi.org 10.1306 01090706091. Minzoni, M., Cantelli, A., Thornton, J., Wignall, B., 2021. Seismic-scale geometries and sequence-stratigraphic architecture of Early Cretaceous syn-post rift carbonate systems, Presalt Section. Brazil. Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ. 509, 105 126. https doi.org 10.1144 SP509-2019-78. Mitchum, R.M., Vail, P.R., Sangree, J.B., 1977. Stratigraphic interpretation of seismic reflection patterns in depositional sequences. In Payton, C.E. Ed. , Seismic Stratigraphy Applications to Hydrocarbon Exploration, vol. 16. AAPG Mem, pp. 117 123. Moreira, J.L.P., Madeira, C.V., Gil, J.A., Machado, M.A.P., 2007. Bacia de Santos. Boletim geocie nc. Petrobras 15, 531 549 in Portuguese . Muggeridge, A., Mamode, H., 2012. Hydrodynamic aquifer or reservoir compartmentalization Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Bull. 96, 315 336. https doi.org 10.1306 06141110169. Muniz, M.C., Bosence, D.W.J., 2015. Pre-salt microbialites from the Campos Basin offshore Brazil image log facies, facies model and cyclicity in lacustrine carbonates. Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ. 418, 221 242. https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.10. Muniz, M.C., Bosence, D.W.J., 2018. Lacustrine carbonate platforms facies, cycles, and tectonosedimentary models for the presalt lagoa feia group lower cretaceous , Campos Basin, Brazil. Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Bull. 102, 2569 2597. https doi. org 10.1306 0511181620617087. Neves, I. de A., Lupinacci, W.M., Ferreira, D.J.A., Zambrini, J.P.R., Oliveira, L.O.A., Olho Azul, M., Ferrari, A.L., Gamboa, L.A.P., 2019. Presalt reservoirs of the Santos Basin cyclicity, electrofacies, and tectonic-sedimentary evolution. Interpretation 7. https doi.org 10.1190 INT-2018-0237.1. SH33 SH43. Norton, D.L., 1984. Theory of hydrothermal systems. Annu. Rev. Earth Planet Sci. 12, 155. https adsabs.harvard.edu pdf 1984AREPS..12..155N. Oliveira, L.C., Oliveira, R.M.A.G., Pereira, E., 2018. Seismic characteristics of the onshore Abrolhos magmatism, East-Brazilian continental margin. Marine and Petroleum Geology 89 Part 2 , 488 499. https doi.org 10.1016 j. marpetgeo.2017.10.016. Oliveira, L.C., Rancan, C.C., 2018. Ocorre ncia de condutos hidrotemais hydrothermal vents na sec a o aptiana da Bacia de Santos. In Congresso Brasileiro de Geologia, vol. 49, p. 2008. Rio de Janeiro, 2018. Oliveira, L.C., Rancan, C.C., Sartorato, A.C.L., Farias, F.A., Pereira, E., 2021. Drowning unconformities on presalt carbonate platforms examples from the Itapema Formation lower cretaceous , Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 577, 110570 https doi.org 10.1016 j. palaeo.2021.110570. Peng, W., Guo, F., Hu, G., Lyu, Y., Gong, D., Liu, J., Feng, Z., Guo, J., Guo, Y., Han, W., 2019. Geochemistry and accumulation process of natural gas in the shenmu gas field, ordos basin, central China. J. Pet. Sci. Eng. 180, 1022 1033. https doi.org 10.1016 j.petrol.2019.05.067. Penna, R., Arau jo, S., Geisslinger, A., Sansonowski, R., Oliveira, L., Rosseto, J., Matos, M., 2019. Carbonate and igneous rock characterization through reprocessing, FWI imaging, and elastic inversion of a legacy seismic data set in Brazilian presalt province. Lead. Edge 38, 11 19. https doi.org 10.1190 tle38010011.1. Pereira, M.J., Macedo, J.M., 1990. Santos Basin the outlook for a new petroleum province on the Southeastern Brazilian continental shelf. Boletim Geocie nc. Petrobras 4. https www.osti.gov etdeweb biblio 449884. Permanyer, A., Ma rquez, G., Gallego, J.R., 2013. Compositional variability in oils and formation waters from the Ayoluengo and Hontomi n fields Burgos, Spain . Implications for assessing biodegradation and reservoir compartmentalization. Org. Geochem. 54, 125 139. https doi.org 10.1016 j.orggeochem.2012.10.007. Peters, K.E., Fowler, M.G., 2002. Applications of petroleum geochemistry to exploration and reservoir management. Org. Geochem. 33, 5 36. https doi.org 10.1016 S0146-6380 01 00125-5. Petersohn, E., Morelatto, R., Batista, C.M.A., Vital, J.C.S., 2021. The Giant Mero oil field geological and petrophysical settings of one of the largest pre-salt fields of the Santos Basin, southern Brazil. In Mello, Marcio R., Yilmaz, Pinar O., Katz, Barry J. Eds. , The Supergiant Lower Cretaceous Pre-salt Petroleum Systems of the Santos Basin, Brazil AAPG Memoir 124, pp. 351 374. https doi.org 10.1306 13722325MSB.13.1853. Petrobras, 2014. Declaramos comercialidade das a reas de Iara e Entorno de Iara, no pre sal da Bacia de Santos, Petrobras, December 30th In Portuguese access date August 15, 2022 . https petrobras.com.br en us fatos-e-dados declaramos-comer cialidade-das-areas-de-iara-e-entorno-de-iara-no-pre-sal-da-bacia-de-santos.htm. Pietzsch, R., Oliveira, D.M., Tedeschi, L.R., Queiroz Neto, J.V., Figueiredo, M.F., Vazquez, J.C., de Souza, R.S., 2018. Palaeohydrology of the Lower Cretaceous presalt lacustrine system, from rift to post-rift phase, Santos Basin, Brazil. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 507, 60 80. https doi.org 10.1016 j. palaeo.2018.06.043. Pirajno, F., 1992. Hydrothermal systems. In Hydrothermal Mineral Deposits. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. https doi.org 10.1007 978-3-642-75671-9 4. Pirajno, F., 2009. Hydrothermal Processes and Mineral Systems. Springer, Berlin, p. 1250. Planke, S., Rassmussen, T., Rey, S.S., Myklebust, R., 2005. Seismic characteristics and distribution of volcanic intrusions and hydrothermal vent complexes in the V ring and M re basins. In Dore, T., Vining, B. Eds. , Petroleum Geology North-West Europe and Global Perspectives - Proceedings of the 6th Petroleum Geology Conference. Geological Society Publishing House, London. https doi.org 10.1144 0060833. Pomerantz, A.E., Ventura, G.T., McKenna, A.M., Can as, J.A., Auman, J., Koerner, K., Curry, D., Nelson, R.K., Reddy, C.M., Rodgers, R.P., Marshall, A.G., Peters, K.E., Mullins, O.C., 2010. Combining biomarker and bulk compositional gradient analysis to assess reservoir connectivity. Org. Geochem. 41, 812 821. https doi.org 10.1016 j.orggeochem.2010.05.003. Prinzhofer, A., Rocha Mello, M., Takaki, T., 2000. Geochemical characterization of natural gas a physical multivariable approach and its applications in maturity and migration estimates. Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Bull. 84 https doi.org 10.1306 A9673C66-1738-11D7-8645000102C1865D. Raba a, A.S., Nagel, A., 2004. Integrating pressure data from formation tester, geochemical fingerprinting, and PVT studies to characterize deep gas reservoir continuity and compartmentalization case study. In All Days. SPE. https doi.org 10.2118 90341-MS. Rancan, C.C., Oliveira, L.C., Carmo, I. de O., et al., 2018. Rochas i gneas do bloco de Libra, bacia de Santos. In Congresso Brasileiro de Geologia, vol. 49. Rio de Janeiro, 2018, p. 2012. In Portuguese . Available online at http cbg2018anais.siteoficial. ws resumos 7327.pdf access date July 21, 2022 . Ren, K., Oliveira, M.J.R., Zhao, Junfeng, Zhao, Jian, Oliveira, L.C., Rancan, C.C., Carmo, I.O., Deng, Q., 2019. Using wireline logging and thin sections to identify 27 J.C.S. Vital et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 151 2023 106163 sulfur compounds. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 144, 105763 https doi.org 10.1016 j. marpetgeo.2022.105763. Stanton, N., Ponte-Neto, C., Bijani, R., Masini, E., Fontes, S., Flexor, J.-M., 2014. A geophysical view of the Southeastern Brazilian margin at Santos Basin insights into rifting evolution. J. South Am. Earth Sci. 55, 141 154. https doi.org 10.1016 j.jsames.2014.07.003. Szatmari, P., Milani, E.J., 2016. Tectonic control of the oil-rich large igneous-carbonatesalt province of the South Atlantic rift. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 77, 567 596. https doi. org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2016.06.004. Tozer, R.S.J., Borthwick, A.M., 2010. Variation in fluid contacts in the Azeri field, Azerbaijan sealing faults or hydrodynamic aquifer Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ. 347, 103 112. https doi.org 10.1144 SP347.8. Weissenburger, K.S., Borbas, T., 2004. Fluid properties, phase and compartmentalization magnolia Field case study, Deepwater Gulf of Mexico, USA. Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ. 237, 231 255. https doi.org 10.1144 GSL.SP.2004.237.01.14. Westrich, J.T., Fuex, A.M., O Neal, P.M., Halpern, H.I., 1999. Evaluating reservoir architecture in the northern gulf of Mexico with oil and gas chemistry. SPE Reservoir Eval. Eng. 2, 514 519. https doi.org 10.2118 59518-PA. Wonham, J.P., Cyrot, M., Nguyen, T., Louhouamou, J., Ruau, O., 2010. Integrated approach to geomodelling and dynamic simulation in a complex mixed siliciclastic carbonate reservoir, N Kossa field, Offshore Congo. Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ. 347, 133 163. https doi.org 10.1144 SP347.10. Wright, V.P., 2022. The mantle, CO2 and the giant Aptian chemogenic lacustrine carbonate factory of the South Atlantic some carbonates are made, not born. Sedimentology 69, 47 73. https doi.org 10.1111 sed.12835. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2015. An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates. Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ. 418, 209 219. https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.3. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A., 2017a. Classifying reservoir carbonates when the status quo simply does not work a case study from the Cretaceous of the South Atlantic. Search and Discovery Article 51419. In Adapted from Oral Presentation Given at AAPG 2017. Annual Convention and Exhibition, Houston, Texas, USA. April 2-5, 2017. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A., 2017b. Critically evaluating the current depositional models for the pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, offshore Brazil. London, England, October 15-18, 2017. In Adapted from Keynote Address Given at AAPG SEG International Conference and Exhibition. AAPG Search and Discovery Article 51439 2017 , posted November 20, 2017. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2020. The textural evolution and ghost matrices of the Cretaceous Barra Velha Formation carbonates from the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. Facies 66, 7. https doi.org 10.1007 s10347-019-0591-2. Wright, P., Rodriguez, K., 2018. Reinterpreting the South Atlantic Pre-Salt Microbialite reservoirs petrographic, isotopic and seismic evidence for a shallow evaporitic lake depositional model. First Break 36, 71 77. https doi.org 10.3997 1365-2397. n0094. Wright, V.P., Tosca, N.J., 2016. In Geochemical Model for the Formation of the Pre-salt Reservoirs, Santos Basin, Brazil Implications for Understanding Reservoir Distribution. Search and Discovery Article 51304. Adapted from Oral Presentation Given at AAPG Annual Convention Exhibition, Calgary, Alberta, Canada. June 19 22, 2016. Zalan, P., Newman, E., 2019. The fantastic microbialite reservoirs in Santos and Campos basins depositional models, crustal inheritance control on the petroleum system and risks associated for commercial discoveries. In First EAGE Workshop on Pre-salt Reservoir from Exploration to Production. European Association of Geoscientists Engineers, pp. 1 5. https doi.org 10.3997 2214-4609.201982101. Zalan, P.V., Severino, M.G., Rigoti, C.A., Magnavita, L.P., Oliveira, J.A.B., Viana, A.R., 2011. An entirely new 3-D view of the crustal and mantle structure of a South Atlantic passive margin - Santos, Campos and Espi rito Santo basins, Brazil. Houston, Texas, USA. In AAPG Annual Conference and Exhibition. April 10-13, 2011. igneous contact metamorphism and hydrothermal influence on presalt limestone reservoirs in Libra block, Santos Basin. In Day 2 Wed. OTC. https doi.org 10.4043 29818-MS. October 30, 2019. Renaut, R.W., Owen, R.B., Jones, B., Tiercelin, J.J., Tarits, C., Ego, J.K., Konhauser, K.O., 2013. Impact of lake-level changes on the formation of thermogene travertine in continental rifts evidence from Lake Bogoria, Kenya Rift Valley. Sedimentology 60, 428 468. https doi.org 10.1111 j.1365-3091.2012.01347.x. Rigoti, C.A., 2015. Evoluc a o tecto nica da Bacia de Santos com e nfase na geometria crustal interpretac a o integrada de dados de si smica de reflexa o e refrac a o, gravimetria e magnetometria. MSc. Thesis UERJ. Brazil. 134 access date August 15, 2022 . https www.bdtd.uerj.br 8443 handle 1 7131. Rocha, Y., dos, S., Pereira, R.C.L., Mendonc a Filho, J.G., 2019. Geochemical assessment of oils from the Mero field, Santos Basin. Brazil. Org. Geochem. 130, 1 13. https doi.org 10.1016 j.orggeochem.2019.01.011. Rolfsva g, T.A., Danielsen, T.M., 2016. Perched water static model. In Day 1 Wed. SPE. https doi.org 10.2118 180000-MS. April 20, 2016. Rostirolla, S.P., Mello, M.R., Peres, W., Pedrosa Jr., O.A., Kemna, H.A., Carmo Jr., G., Cardoso Netto, A., 2021. Unravelling the pre-salt province of Santos and Campos basins exploration risks of selected key elements of the petroleum system. In Mello, Marcio R., Yilmaz, Pinar O., Katz, Barry J. Eds. , The Supergiant Lower Cretaceous Pre-salt Petroleum Systems of the Santos Basin, Brazil AAPG Memoir 124, pp. 431 462. Sabato Ceraldi, T., Green, D., 2017. Evolution of the South Atlantic lacustrine deposits in response to Early Cretaceous rifting, subsidence and lake hydrology. Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ. 438, 77 98. https doi.org 10.1144 SP438.10. Saller, A., Rushton, S., Buambua, L., Inman, K., McNeil, R., Dickson, J.A.D., Tony , 2016. Presalt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola. Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Bull. 100, 1135 1164. https doi.org 10.1306 02111615216. Santos Neto, E.V.D., 2004. Gas geochemistry a new technology to evaluate petroleum systems. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 12, 357 383. Santos Neto, E.V., Cerqueira, J.R., Prinzhofer, A., 2012. Origin of CO2 in Brazilian Basins. Search Discovery Article, 40969. Scott, E.D., Gelin, F., Jolley, S.J., Leenaarts, E., Sadler, S.P., Elsinger, R.J., 2010. Sedimentological control of fluid flow in deep marine turbidite reservoirs pierce Field, UK Central North Sea. Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ. 347, 113 132. https doi.org 10.1144 SP347.9. Smalley, P.C., England, W.A., 1994. Reservoir compartmentalization assessed with fluid compositional data. SPE Reservoir Eng. 9, 175 180. https doi.org 10.2118 25005-PA. Smalley, P.C., Hale, N.A., 1996. Early identification of reservoir compartmentalization by combining a range of conventional and novel data types. SPE Form. Eval. 11, 163 169. https doi.org 10.2118 30533-PA. Smalley, P.C., Muggeridge, A.H., 2010. Reservoir compartmentalization get it before it gets you. Geol. Soc. London, Spec. Publ. 347, 25 41. https doi.org 10.1144 SP347.3. Sousa Ju nior, G.F., 2020. Caracterizac a o Faciolo gica de Testemunho do Pre -Sal, Bacia de Santos, Campo de Sururu.Bachelor s Thesis, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro. Brazil. 82. In Portuguese . Available online at accessed 21 July 2022 access date July 21, 2022 . https pantheon.ufrj.br bitstream 11422 13443 1 SOUSA 20JUNIOR 2C 20G.F.pdf. Souza, I.A.D., 2008. Falhas de transfere ncia da porc a o norte da bacia de Santos interpretadas a partir de dados si smicos sua influe ncia na evoluc a o e deformac a o da bacia. Brazil. 202. In Portuguese . Available online at . Doctoral Thesis Universidade Estadual Paulista Instituto de Geocie ncias e Cie ncias Exatas access date August 16, 2022 . https repositorio.unesp.br handle 11449 102986. Souza, I.V.A.F., Ellis, G.S., Ferreira, A.A., Guzzo, J.V.P., Di az, R.A., Albuquerque, A.L.S., Amrani, A., 2022. Geochemical characterization of natural gases in the pre-salt section of the Santos Basin Brazil focused on hydrocarbons and volatile organic 28

[END_OF_PAPER]

Petroleum Science 21 2024 1699e1718 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Petroleum Science journal homepage www.keaipublishing.com en journals petroleum-science Original Paper Geostatistical seismic inversion and 3D modelling of metric flow units, porosity and permeability in Brazilian presalt reservoir Rodrigo Penna a, b, , Wagner Moreira Lupinacci a a Exploratory Interpretation and Reservoir Characterization Group GIECAR , Department of Geology and Geophysics, Universidade Federal Fluminense, i, RJ, 24210-346, Brazil Nitero b Petrobras, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 20031-912, Brazil a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t Article history Received 11 May 2022 Received in revised form 29 January 2024 Accepted 26 February 2024 Available online 27 February 2024 Flow units FU rock typing is a common technique for characterizing reservoir flow behavior, producing reliable porosity and permeability estimation even in complex geological settings. However, the lateral extrapolation of FU away from the well into the whole reservoir grid is commonly a difficult task and using the seismic data as constraints is rarely a subject of study. This paper proposes a workflow to generate numerous possible 3D volumes of flow units, porosity and permeability below the seismic resolution limit, respecting the available seismic data at larger scales. The methodology is used in the Mero Field, a Brazilian presalt carbonate reservoir located in the Santos Basin, who presents a complex and heterogenic geological setting with different sedimentological processes and diagenetic history. We generated metric flow units using the conventional core analysis and transposed to the well log data. Then, given a Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm, the seismic data and the well log statistics, we simulated acoustic impedance, decametric flow units DFU , metric flow units MFU , porosity and permeability volumes in the metric scale. The aim is to estimate a minimum amount of MFU able to calculate realistic scenarios porosity and permeability scenarios, without losing the seismic lateral control. In other words, every porosity and permeability volume simulated produces a synthetic seismic that match the real seismic of the area, even in the metric scale. The achieved 3D results represent a high-resolution fluid flow reservoir modelling considering the lateral control of the seismic during the process and can be directly incorporated in the dynamic characterization workflow. 2024 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license http creativecommons.org licenses by 4.0 . Edited by Jie Hao and Meng-Jiao Zhou Keywords Flow units Geostatistical inversion Presalt reservoir 3D reservoir modelling Petrophysical modelling 1. Introduction Complex geology reservoir systems present many challenges to generate coherent static and dynamic models for reservoir simulation. The representation of reservoir heterogeneities and flow patterns comprehend the most important step to predict subsurface fluid movement, production and injection, especially in giant oil fields where prediction errors can result in a great loss of investment. Flow units FUs reservoir rock typing can present an advantage over lithological rock typing in the 3D model building process using seismic data as a constraint, as FU provides better estimations of reservoir petrophysical properties, like porosity f and absolute permeability k , even in complex geological settings Penna and Corresponding author. E-mail address rpenna petrobras.com.br R. Penna . Lupinacci, 2021 . Once FUs may not have any relation with the lithology, incorporating FUs into reservoir models, which are essentially built with geological premises, is quite challenge for any asset team. Lithological facies, for instance, can comprehend two distinct FUs, depending on the diagenetic evolution of both rocks. Due to pore obliteration or generation processes, lithological facies would present different fluid flow and petrophysical patterns, and different consequences when submitted to production or injection Penna and Lupinacci, 2020 . FU rock typing has been performed from flow zone indicator FZI Nabawy et al., 2018 , electrical parameters Ghanbarian et al., 2018 , FZI-star Mirzaei-Paiaman et al., 2018 Rocha et al., 2019 and mercury injection capillary pressure Liu et al., 2019 , demonstrating how FUs are a powerful tool to predict storage and flow capacity of the reservoir, regardless of the geological complexity. Penna and Lupinacci 2021 showed that the 3D porosity and permeability performed on the basis of FU is a valuable and accurate tool to be incorporated into workflows in the construction of https doi.org 10.1016 j.petsci.2024.02.013 1995-8226 2024 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license http creativecommons.org licenses by 4.0 . R. Penna and W.M. Lupinacci Petroleum Science 21 2024 1699e1718 produced Moczydlower et al., 2019 . The drilled wells by the consortium are keepers and will be used as producers or water alternating gas WAG injectors. Santos Basin evolution history also Libra block, consequently initiates with basalts from Camburiu Formation 138e130 million years as the response for the initial Gondwana breakup. Pic arras Formation Barremian age corresponds to the initial rift stage of the continental breakup, with sandstones, mudstones and shales deposited in lacustrine environments Carlotto et al., 2017 . From the Neobarremian until Eoaptian ages, rudstones from Itapema Formation were deposited in high energy platform settings. In lower energy settings, usually in relative structural low, organic rich shales occur. These rocks are considered the main hydrocarbon source in the Santos Basin Moreira et al., 2007 . The Barra Velha Formation deposits are from transitional environments between continental to shallow marine settings, the lower part to the intraAlagoas unconformity still belongs to the rift phase and the upper part belongs to the sag phase Buckley et al., 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2015 Neves et al., 2019 . The base of the sequence are predominantly grainstones and packstones reword facies , while in the top shrubs, spherulites and laminites in-situ facies occur more frequently Gomes et al., 2020 . In the late Aptian, already in marine environment, a thick salt sequence from Ariri Formation were deposited. This layer is the main Santos basin hydrocarbon seal and is mainly composed by halite and anhydrite Moreira et al., 2007 . Fig. 2 shows the Santos Basin presalt lithostratigraphy, tectonic evolution and unconformities adopted in this work. Main reservoir rocks of Mero field are bivalve rudstones coquinas from the Itapema Formation and shrubs and spherulites from the Barra Velha Formation, although high porosity is also found in rework facies as bioclastic floatstone, grainstones and, packstones Jesus et al., 2017 Penna and Lupinacci, 2020 Penna and Lupinacci, 2021 . Several diagenetic effects of dissolution and neomorphism, replacement of minerals, silicification and dolomitization are identified, and correspond to the main effects that controls porosity generation and or obliteration and, consequently, fluid movements in the reservoir Herlinger et al., 2017 Gomes et al., 2020 Leite et al., 2020 Sartorato et al., 2020 . A unique feature of the Libra block and Mero reservoir is the abundant igneous rocks presence Penna et al., 2019 Oliveira et al., 2021 . Extrusive igneous rocks are of Barremian Aptian age and mainly composed by tholeiitic basalts, more commonly found below Itapema Formation Penna et al., 2019 . Intrusive igneous rocks are of Santonian Campanian ages, mainly alkaline, and can occur anywhere in the stratigraphy cutting surrounding rocks or concordant to the sedimentary layering e.g., top of the Barra Velha Formation . The correct mapping and prediction of these rocks are very relevant for the characterization and management of the reservoir, once they penalize the total oil in place volume, they can act as flow barriers or even high permeability layers, if fracturing is high enough and contribute to the regional aquifer and pressure maintenance. reservoir models. Because of the FU incorporation difficulties and lack of correlation with lithological facies, most 3D static models built from FU are merely a geostatistical procedure away from the well control, without any lateral constraint of the facies interpolation Li et al., 2017 Zhang et al., 2018 . However, recent studies have incorporated seismic data into the FU modelling workflow for the FU interpolation. Iravani et al. 2018 considered the acoustic impedance as constraint for interpolation of petrophysical properties in a FU template. Yarmohammadi et al. 2014 , Rastegarnia et al. 2016 and Hatampour et al. 2018 applied artificial intelligence to obtain linear relationships between FU and seismic attributes, creating their constraints to the FU facies modelling. Penna and Lupinacci 2021 used a cumulative S-curve analysis to create a decametric FU rock typing, and, through a Bayesian probabilistic model, performed 3D porosity and permeability, adequate to the seismic acoustic impedance resolution. All these seismic-generated FU models can later be successfully incorporated in the static modelling workflow of the reservoir, as hard constraints or secondary variable in co-kriging techniques. The usage of seismic attributes provides lateral control for FU interpolation away from the well and is especially relevant in large reservoirs with a reduced number of drilled wells. However, the vertical resolution of deterministic seismic inversion products is limited to the decametric scale, above 20 m for Brazilian presalt reservoirs more details in Penna and Lupinacci, 2021 . In seismicincorporated FUs and fluids movements detection, the scale of observation is crucial as, for instance, porous fractured media will be more or less connected depending on the grid size Haridy et al., 2020 . Conventional methods of seismic facies classification do not extrapolate the vertical resolution further from the input data limit. Considering that most of the FU classifications are made in the core scale millimetric and transposed to well log scale centimetric , then several upscale and downscale assumptions are needed to incorporate the decametric seismic results Penna and Lupinacci, 2021 . This paper proposes an approach to estimate seismic derived petrophysical property volumes at the metric scale. Using data percentiles and a cumulative S-curve from the core porosity and absolute permeability, we calculated a significant number of decametric and metric flow units that correlates with seismic acoustic impedance and responds for both large and small scales flow characteristics of the reservoir. Within each iteration of decametric and metric flow units from the geostatistical seismic inversion, we co-simulated petrophysical properties volumes that respect the well information in the metric scale and are laterally consistent with the local geology, regardless of the input resolution limit. 2. Study area and geological settings Mero reservoir, part of the Libra block, is located in the northeast portion of the Santos Basil, Brazil Fig. 1 . The consortium that operates the field consists of Petrobras, Shell, Total, CNOOC and CNPC, under the new Brazilian production-sharing contract ruled -Sal Petro leo S.A. PPSA . The initial exploratory phase of the by Pre block estimates an oil in place volume between 8 and 12 billion BOE Carlotto et al., 2017 , with high-complexity geology, igneous rocks occurrence Penna et al., 2019 Penna and Lupinacci, 2020, 2021 Oliveira et al., 2021 and diagenetic effects Leite et al., 2020 Sartorato et al., 2020 . One of the main hydrocarbon fluid characteristics from Mero Field is the high CO2 content 44 in the gas phase , which imposes several challenges to the reservoir management. The production design comprises a floating production storage and offloading FPSO designed to reinject all the gas 3. Data available The consortium that operates the field performed an extensive core program with approximately 500 m of linear samples taken in both Barra Velha and Itapema formations. 1700 conventional core and plug analysis measurements of porosity and permeability are available in different stratigraphic levels from seventeen drilled wells. We organized and analyzed this datasheet for the purpose of flow unit classification. Twelve well logs are also available and comprehends sets of both logging while drilling LWD and wireline gamma ray, resistivity, compressional and shear slowness, density, nuclear magnetic resonance porosities total, effective and 1700 R. Penna and W.M. Lupinacci Petroleum Science 21 2024 1699e1718 Fig. 1. a Mero reservoir and Libra block location in southeast Brazil. b Top of reservoir Barra Velha Formation structural map. c NW-SE seismic section a stratigraphic interpretation after Penna and Lupinacci, 2021 . free fluid and permeability and elements e.g., calcium, potassium and magnesium . The available seismic data is a legacy seismic acquisition that cover the whole Libra block with an 8 km streamer cable length, 6.25 25 m grid and 5 m of vertical sampling. This data was prestack reprocessed in 2016 with an initial tilted transversely isotropic TTI velocity model and a vertical transversely isotropic full waveform inversion VTI-FWI from 3 to 45 Hz. Then, a multilayer tomography using both Kirchhoff and reverse time migration RTM picks was performed, followed by a TTI-FWI from 7 to 8 Hz applied at the entire geologic sequence pos-salt, salt and presalt as detailed by Araujo and Gouveia 2015 . For the FWI velocity model, high and low-salt velocity layers, like anhydrite, tachyhydrite, carnallite and sylvinite, as well as igneous rocks, 1701 R. Penna and W.M. Lupinacci Petroleum Science 21 2024 1699e1718 Fig. 2. Santos Basin presalt lithostratigraphy, tectonic evolution and unconformities After Buckley et al., 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2015 Neves et al., 2019 . within the salt stratification, were incorporated. This procedure is presented and discussed and by Seifert et al. 2017 . In the presalt interval, the seismic data has approximately 15 Hz of peak frequency with bandwidth of 5e35 Hz. Based on the local geology petrophysical characteristics and the seismic spectral distribution, Penna and Lupinacci 2021 created a wedge model to estimate the vertical resolution of the full-stack seismic considering the true thickness resolving capacity. According to their analyses, the vertical resolution is 62 m when considering the seismic amplitude and 23 m from inverted acoustic impedance volume. Thus, any layer below these limits will be falsely estimated in terms of thickness. This means that facies or flow unit mapped from seismic amplitude or inverted acoustic impedance volumes will present decametric proportions. 4. Metric flow units facies discretization and rock typing statistics Fig. 3. Barra Velha and Itapema formations SMLP. Black lines represent decametric scale flow units, and green lines represent metric scale flow units. In this chart, storage capacity is the product of core porosity versus layer thickness, and flow capacity is the product of core permeability versus layer thickness. We considered this only as a qualitative plot, and a great visual tool for evidencing the scale-dependence of the petrophysical properties. Considering the amount of conventional core analysis available in the Mero reservoir, we used two methods based on permeability k versus porosity f for flow unit discretization. First, we considered Gunter et al. 1997 stratigraphic modified Lorenz plot SMLP as a visual aid to estimate a minimum number of flow units and identify local reservoir flow trends in both decametric and metric scales. Then, we calculated rock quality index flow zone indicator RQI FZI for the discretization Amaefule et al., 1993 . Those are both extensively documented methods successfully applied in both clastic and carbonate geological settings. The SMLP was first introduced by Gunter et al. 1997 by plotting the percent storage capacity product of porosity and thickness versus percent flow capacity product of permeability and thickness , providing a visual guide to estimate how many FUs are necessary to honor the geologic framework in terms of fluid movement in the subsurface. Fig. 3 shows the SMLP plot of both Barra Velha and Itapema formations, using percentiles of all the samples for a cleaner display of the chart. The minimum number of the FU estimate is performed by observing the slope and behavior of the curve as the mean storage and flow capacity increases, we have better flow units in terms of its permoporous characteristics. In that sense, flat segments can correspond to seals, baffle zones or low-production zones, as they may present some level of porosity, but have limited contribution of permeability. Steep segments correspond to speed zones of the reservoir, and they can have low or high porosity, but provide major contributions to the reservoir flow performance. We estimated the minimum number of flow units in the SMLP using a sequence stratigraphy reasoning for high order and low order variations, like a Wheeler Diagram interpretation Wheeler, 1958 . The plot in Fig. 3 clearly demonstrates how the flow unit characterization is scale dependent. Variations of the low- and high-frequency cycles are correlational since the slope of the low frequency curve depends on the constructive effect of each high frequency curve. Penna and Lupinacci 2021 introduced a workflow for the detection of decametric flow units using inverted acoustic and shear impedance volumes, considering the black lines 1702 R. Penna and W.M. Lupinacci Petroleum Science 21 2024 1699e1718 1. Take all the core porosity and permeability measurements and calculate statistical relevant percentiles the number varies depending on the data characteristics . Each percentile is a representative sample from a given interval. 2. Calculate RQI and FZI values using Eqs. 1 and 2 and the percentiles values. 3. Order the data with increasing values of log FZI . 4. Accumulate and normalize the percentiles of permeability values. 5. Calculate the slope of the curve for each sample Fig. 4 . as decametric trend Fig. 3 . However, our purpose here is to characterize higher orders of fluid movements in the reservoir as metric flow units using the acoustic impedance as constraints obtained from a geostatistical seismic inversion. For this, eight FU are considered as metric flow trends green lines in Fig. 3. SMLP are used, in this work, only as a visual guide for this scale-dependence of the petrophysical properties. The flow unit discretization is performed in the core analysis using the rock quality index flow zone indicator RQI FZI , and then transposed to the well log data. This method is based on permeability in mD and effective porosity fE ratio and derived from a generalization of the Kozeny-Carmen equations Kozeny, 1927 . It was introduced by Amaefule et al. 1993 and is widely used due to its simplicity and assertive results. Let the index RQI reservoir quality index, in mm be sffiffiffiffiffiffi k RQI 1 4 0 0314 fE As described in the SMLP, at least two scales of variations are observable in the derivative data Fig. 3 one on a small scale higher order , related to metric variations, and other on a large scale lower order , related to decametre variations. Penna and Lupinacci 2021 chosen to interpretate the major jumps in the slope curve as the decametric flow characteristics changes in the reservoir, although this can be extended to many scales. The lower scale of observation responds to low frequency variations in the SMLP and FZI S-curve plots, and higher order of variations responds to high frequency variations. This was fit for purpose, as the scope of their work were to characterize flow units in the decametric scale and then correlate with elastic attributes. Given that the aim 1 where k is the absolute permeability in mD and fE the effective porosity. Then, the FZI is given by FZI 1 4 RQI fZ 2 where fZ is an effective porosity normalization on the form fZ 1 4 fE 1 fE. Since its derivation from Kozeny-Carmen equations, FZI value is approximates an average pore throat radius for a given porous media, relating effective porosity and permeability. Different sedimentation environments, late diagenetic processes and reservoir geometry are also controlling parameters of FZI Tiab and Donaldson, 2004 . Taking log on both sides of Eq. 2 and rearranging it, we verify the linearity between FZI, RQI and fZ logRQI 1 4 logFZI log fZ 3 In log-log plot of the RQI versus fZ , a constant value of the FZI produces an inclined straight line. The inference is that samples with similar flow behavior falls around a corresponding slope line, determining a single flow unit FU . Samples with distinct flow characteristics are plotted in different parallel lines and arrange distinct flow units. Different methodologies for clustering samples around FZI values and creating FU are available in the literature and applied in different geological scenarios. In some cases, a simple log FZI histogram discretization is enough to discretize the flow units considering that the samples show strong FZI versus permeability correlation and a log-normal FZI distribution . More complex methods, such as iterative multi-linear regressions Al-Ajmi and Holditch, 2000 and normal probability plots cumulative distribution function, Mahjour et al., 2016 are also widely used, especially in more complex geological settings. Penna and Lupinacci 2020, 2021 showed that the usage of percentiles and a cumulative S-curve produced a significant minimum amount of flow units with statistical relevance, without compromising the estimation of petrophysical properties. This is particularly relevant to the scope of this study, considering the amount of k and f measurements, the high complexity degree of the Mero reservoir, and the aim to correlate the FU to seismic data with respect to its vertical resolution limit. The steps to construct the RQI FZI cumulative S-curve, as presented by Penna and Lupinacci 2021 , are. Fig. 4. The log FZI S-curve for MFU discretization. Grey line corresponds to decametric FU classification after Penna and Lupinacci, 2021 and red line corresponds to metric FU classification. 1703 R. Penna and W.M. Lupinacci Petroleum Science 21 2024 1699e1718 of the present study is to get a step further, discretizing metric flow units with the seismic data, we interpret the major jumps in the slope plot, first order variation, that corresponds to the decametric FU, same as Penna and Lupinacci 2021 , and the second order variation, as the metric FU. Using both effective porosity and permeability from the nuclear magnetic resonance NMR well logs, the RQI FZI values are calculated for each well through Eqs. 1 and 2 . The discretization of the FU in the metric MFU and decametric DFU scales from the FZI S-curve plot is shown in Fig. 4. Eight metric flow units are interpreted considering the changes in the FZI S-curve slope. Note that the number of metric flow units correlates to the SMLP interpretation as a higher order variation from the decametric scale. The cut-offs in log FZI used for discretizing the flow metric units MFU are shown in Table 1. The initial flat segment parallel to the X axis of the FZI S-curve Fig. 4 describes FUs that have no contributions to the flow behavior in the metric scale. Therefore, MFU1 and MFU2 are considered seals or baffle zones that retain fluid flow, acting as vertical and horizontal barriers. In general, rocks with reduced matrix porosity like igneous rocks, cemented and clayey carbonates are into these units. MFU3 is denoted by the initial detachment of the curve from the X axis, and, subsequently, MFU4 Fig. 4 . These FUs have some flow capacity but are very poor in terms of overall reservoir flow behavior. This is the typical behavior of carbonates with some late diagenetic effects, like quartz and dolomite cementation obliterating the original matrix porosity of the rock. Although not directly considered for production, they are important for maintaining reservoir pressurization over production time. MFU5 and MFU6 are the first ramp up of the curve Fig. 4 , with better permoporous reservoir characteristics then the previous units. Although some level of diagenetic effect can occur, they will have considerable contributions to reservoir flow during production. Some bioclastic grainstones, packstones and wackestones belongs to MFU5 and MFU6, for example. The end of the curve corresponds to the better FUs in terms of permoporous characteristics, MFU7 and MFU8. They have considerable porosity and remarkable flow performance during production. In general, MFU7 and MFU8 correspond to clean calcite carbonates like bivalve rudstones coquinas from the Itapema Formation and shrubs and rework facies from the Barra Velha Formation, with little or none late diagenetic effects Penna and Lupinacci, 2021 . Fig. 5 demonstrates how the new classification differs from the decametric flow unit DFU considering the seismic vertical resolution limitation. The relationship between DFU1 and MFU1 and MFU2, for instance, are quite notable, as the latter are a one-step upscaling of the first one. The mean, median and standard deviation of the acoustic impedance PI , effective porosity f and Schlumberger-Doll Research Al-Ajmi and Holditch, 2000 permeability k for each metric flow units are displayed in Table 2. These calculations were performed using the well logs. Note that the Fig. 5. Application of log FZI cut-off discretization in Well 6 using the effective porosity from the magnetic resonance data. Lithologies on the left correspond to a simplified classification for seismic facies analysis purposes after Penna et al., 2019 . overall values of the PI tend to decrease from MFU1 to MFU8, while porosity and permeability increase. This is expected, as MFU1 corresponds to low-FZI values small pore throat radius and MFU8 has high-FZI values large pore throat radius . In general, the distribution of PI, porosity and permeability for MFU are close to symmetric, with little mean versus median differences. 5. Geostatistical seismic inversion for metric flow units Table 1 Metric FU MFU cut-offs from the FZI S-curve. 5.1. Stochastic seismic inversion method log FZI values MFU1 MFU2 MFU3 MFU4 MFU5 MFU6 MFU7 MFU8 Geostatistics is a modelling tool that plays an important role in building earth models. In geoscience, initially developed with the constant grow of the mining industry, geostatistical concepts and algorithms have been widely adopted in the oil exploration and production for many purposes Pereira et al., 2017 Feng et al., 2018 Ferreira and Lupinacci, 2018 Kneller et al., 2019 Pec anha et al., 2019 . These techniques are traditionally used to interpolate the target property, most commonly facies, porosity and permeability, below 2.2 2.2 to 0.5 0.5 to 0.2 0.2 to 0.4 0.4 to 0.8 0.8 to 1.9 1.9 to 3.7 Above 3.7 1704 R. Penna and W.M. Lupinacci Petroleum Science 21 2024 1699e1718 prior model, seismic and well data for compute the posterior distribution 3 Sampling, where we used the MH-MCMC algorithm for sampling the posterior pdfs. Briefly, the algorithm builds a pdf that represents P reservoir geostatistics, seismic and sample it for the target property volumes using the MCMC method, i.e., the probability of the produced reservoir model given the input geostatistics and seismic data. The workflow for the stochastic seismic inversion is represented in Fig. 6. The evidence and assumptions are expressed as a series of pdfs defined over the property volumes. We calculated variograms for continuous and discrete properties and property distributions multivariate joint pdfs . Then the seismic data is modelled for acoustic impedance using the convolutional model, and a normal pdf for the seismic noise is calculated directly in the seismic data windowed in the reservoir area to account for seismic noise, there is, uncorrelated differences between real and synthetic seismic Saussus and Sams, 2012 Kneller et al., 2019 . This parameter is directly correlated to the likelihood parameter of the inversion. The steps Fig. 6 are described as. Table 2 Mean, median and standard deviation std. dev. of the acoustic impedance PI , porosity f and permeability k from MFU1 to MFU8 considering both Barra Velha and Itapema formations. PI, g cm3 m s f, frac. k, mD MFU1 mean median std. dev. 16,521 17,478 2785 0.042 0.044 0.019 0.016 0.005 0.022 MFU2 mean median std. dev. 14,829 15,276 1880 0.087 0.082 0.005 0.265 0.234 0.126 MFU3 mean median std. dev. 14,482 14,869 18,645 0.102 0.102 0.007 1.251 1.057 0.634 MFU4 mean median std. dev. 13,874 14,112 1850 0.119 0.118 0.004 5.933 5.658 2.023 MFU5 mean median std. dev. 13,047 13,814 1646 0.144 0.144 0.009 28.23 25.85 12.69 MFU6 mean median std. dev. 11,928 11,022 1599 0.167 0.168 0.004 80.29 78.01 16.77 MFU7 mean median std. dev. 11,522 10,874 1454 0.188 0.188 0.007 232.75 199.08 103.68 MFU8 mean median std. dev. 10,633 9830 1674 0.236 0.220 0.038 1760.67 1146.70 1425.33 I. In the stratigraphic grid, created from seismic horizons, start with an arbitrary reservoir model res0 and select a random location in the volume the current state of the chain . The lateral sampling is consistent with the seismic data grid and the vertical sampling is 1 m. II. Randomly generate a modified realization res1 . A synthetic seismic synth1 is calculated through convolution between the estimated wavelet and res1 acoustic properties. Considering the Bayesian inference scheme, compute the likelihood function of res1 given the real seismic data P seis synth1 . III. Evaluate the prior distribution of the modified realization P res1 geostats , which reflects the lateral and vertical continuity computed from the variograms and the value of the property at neighboring cells. IV. Multiply the prior distribution P res1 geostats with the likelihood function P seis synth1 to compute the posterior probability value given the input information e.g., statistics, well data, seismic horizons and stratigraphy . This step is the Bayesian inference of the algorithm. V. Compare the posterior probability value with the current reservoir model res0. If the proposal res1 has a posterior probability value higher than res0, there is, P res1 geostats, seis P res0 geostats, seis , then res1 is accepted and the chain moves to a different random location considering res1 as the new current state. Otherwise, if the value is smaller, res1 can be randomically rejected and res0 is the current stat for the next step or accepted as a ratio between P res1 geostats, seis and P res0 geostats, seis . Note that this part is the Metropolis-Hastings of the algorithm, avoiding the calculation to be stuck in local maxima minima as lower probabilities are sometimes accepted. VI. The process continues updating for the entire seismic volume until P resn geostats, seis is no longer changing. Due to the large number of calculations needed to sweep the entire volume, the MCMC algorithm only calculate the conditional posterior pdf on a small portion of the volume at a time. Combination them all gives the global posterior pdf. between well data within a stratigraphic framework. The most common method is the sequential gaussian simulation SGS, Deutsch and Journel, 1992 . Since the introduction by Haas and Dubrule 1994 , stochastic seismic inversion is an active topic of interest, as the technique introduces seismic data as a constraint to generate possible earth models Doyen, 2007 . However, the direct use of seismic as secondary data for reservoir modelling is usually frustrating because of vertical scale differences between seismic usually decametric resolution and well logs centimetric . Finding a relationship between, for instance, seismic amplitude and or impedance volumes and well log porosity is constantly difficult, making the incorporation of seismic data directly into the SGS workflow a challenge for reservoir characterization Azevedo and Soares, 2018 . The most documented and used methods for stochastic seismic inversion are SGS Escobar et al., 2006 , direct sequential simulation DSS, Soares, 2001 , global stochastic inversion GSI, Soares et al., 2007 and Monte Carlo Markov Chain MCMC Statmod MCTM, Sams et al., 2011 . Although these methods differ in how to sample a prior posterior pdf, they essentially produce multiple realizations of petrophysical properties, considering the stratigraphic grid and a given vertical sampling that can be smaller than the available seismic sampling . Every iteration produces a geologic model that fits the seismic and well log data, i.e., each realization is plausible samples of the reservoir s posterior distribution and a variance measure of the input parameters, considering the seismic data as constrains. In this study, we perform a Metropolis-Hastings MH algorithm within the MCMC method MCMC Statmod MCTM, Sams et al., 2011 to simulate the acoustic impedance. There are three main steps in the stochastic inversion workflow, which are detailed further 1 Statistical modelling, where are estimated the probability density functions pdfs , variograms and trends for each decametric and metric facies 2 Bayesian inference, combining the Note that the MCMC algorithm does not change the whole res0 trace considering a single iteration. Instead, a small portion of the grid is modified a step at a time, until the entire grid is swept. All the pdfs are local, so they are re-calculated every time it moves to another part of the volume. For our purpose, the stochastic seismic inversion fits very well, once we are taking advantage over the seismic constraint in 1705 R. Penna and W.M. Lupinacci Petroleum Science 21 2024 1699e1718 Fig. 6. MCMC Statmod MCTM algorithm workflow. 1706 R. Penna and W.M. Lupinacci Petroleum Science 21 2024 1699e1718 Fig. 7. Experimental and modelled vertical variograms for a acoustic impedance, b decametric flow units and c metric flow units. Experimental variograms were calculated from well logs. decametric scale and explicitly simulating flow units in the metric scale, below the seismic data resolution. The objective is to generate many plausible flow units models and consequently porosity and permeability models in the decametric and metric scales, given the geostatistics associated with every metric flow unit MFU . 5.2. Inputs and parametrization We created the grid using three seismic horizons the tops of the Barra Velha, Itapema and Pic arras formations Fig. 2 , where the first and last horizons represent respectively top and bottom of the reservoirs. The lateral spacing is relative to the seismic grid 25 m 25 m , and vertical sampling is set to 1 m. The stochastic Fig. 8. Experimental and modelled lateral variograms for the a acoustic impedance and b decametric and metric flow units. We calculated the experimental variograms considering elastic inversion volumes PI Penna et al., 2019 and Bayesian facies classification DFU and MFU Penna and Lupinacci, 2021 . 1707 R. Penna and W.M. Lupinacci Petroleum Science 21 2024 1699e1718 MFU P-impedance pdfs a Barra Velha Fm. b Itapema Fm. P-impedance pdfs normal distribution MFU1 MFU5 MFU2 MFU6 MFU3 MFU7 MFU4 MFU8 8000 12000 16000 P-impedance pdfs normal distribution MFU1 MFU5 MFU2 MFU6 MFU3 MFU7 MFU4 MFU8 7000 20000 P-impedance, g cm3 m s 11000 15000 P-impedance, g cm3 m s Fig. 9. P-Impedance pdfs for the MFU in the Barra Velha a and Itapema b formations. mean values for both Barra Velha and Itapema formations, considering the PI volume obtain from the elastic inversion Penna et al., 2019 . For the lateral variograms of the decametric flow units, we used the mode considering each of the most likely facies volumes derived from the Bayesian classification Penna and Lupinacci, 2021 . Both lateral variograms were calculated along the main Mero structural direction, NE-SW. The same DFU lateral variograms were considered for the MFU. Also, no considerable difference was found between lateral variograms of the Barra Velha and Itapema formations, therefore we used the same variograms for both formations. In general, they are a mixture between 90 Gaussian and 10 exponential curves with a range around 2500 m for the PI and 1000 m for DFU and MFU Fig. 8 . Acoustic impedance pdfs for DFU are the same as shown in Penna and Lupinacci 2021 . For MFU, we estimated normal PI pdfs for the Barra Velha and Itapema formations, as shown in Fig. 9. Due to the high resolution of the discretization, it is expected that the PI seismic inversion is set to obtain the acoustic impedance and decametric and metric flow units defined from the FZI cut-offs described in Table 1 . We maintain the FZI S-curve relation between decametric and metric flow units, that is, MFU1 and MFU2 will only occur if DFU1 is present, for instance. This is compatible to the flow multi-scale of observation reasoning used for discretization. We used experimental vertical variograms calculated from well logs for acoustic impedance, decametric and metric flow units. Fig. 7 shows an example of the experimental and modelled variograms. They are a mixture of 60 gaussian and 40 exponential with vertical range of 20 m for PI, of 5e10 m for DFU and of 3e6 m for MFU. No differences were observed between vertical variograms of the Barra Velha and Itapema formations, so we considered the same variogram parametrization for both layers. Experimental lateral variograms were calculated through different maps. For the acoustic impedance were extracted the Fig. 10. a Prior probability NW-SE section through DFU4 3D volume and b the relation between prior probabilities of the DFU and MFU. 1708 R. Penna and W.M. Lupinacci Petroleum Science 21 2024 1699e1718 Fig. 11. a Mean PI and most probable DFU and MFU NW-SE section from 100 MCMC iterations. Iterations 21 b and 86 c PI, DFU and MFU results. 1709 R. Penna and W.M. Lupinacci Petroleum Science 21 2024 1699e1718 Fig. 12. a Mean PI map from the upper Itapema Formation. b DFU and c MFU mode maps from the same stratigraphic layer. Fig. 13. Prior and posterior pdfs for the 100 MCMC iterations. MFU1 posterior pdfs deviates from prior pdfs because of the increasing MFU1 occurrence in structural depressions, areas without any drilled wells sampling mud sediments, usually worse permoporous units with low PI values. 1710 R. Penna and W.M. Lupinacci Petroleum Science 21 2024 1699e1718 Fig. 14. Mean prior and posterior proportions for DFU and MFU considering 100 MCMC iterations. Wells marked with BT were considered as blind tests for the inversion. 1711 R. Penna and W.M. Lupinacci Petroleum Science 21 2024 1699e1718 Fig. 15. Porosity a and permeability b pdfs for the cosimulation. MFU1 and MFU2 are concentered along the zero-permeability axis. Both Barra Velha and Itapema formations show the same behavior. These sections are a good example of the advantage of using the seismic constraints over decametric scale and stochastic simulation over metric scale, below seismic resolution. To illustrate the special distribution, PI mean and DFU and MFU mode maps from the Itapema Formation are displayed in Fig. 12. Overall, prior and posterior pdfs result for PI inversion are consistent, within few errors along Barra Velha and Itapema formations, except for MFU1 and MFU2 Fig. 13 . The reason for the discrepancy for these two flow units is the addition of an increasing a prior probability of DFU1 at lower structural regions areas without drilled wells , mainly with predominance of mud sediments that corresponds to low PI values. Because of those areas, this pushes the posterior MFU1 and MFU2 PI values to the left of the plot. For the other MFUs, metrics such as mean, standard deviation, P10 and P90 are in match between prior and posterior pdfs. The overall prior and posterior proportions of DFU and MFU for both Barra Velha and Itapema formations is presented in Fig. 14. MCMC inversion produced occurrence volumes that corroborate the well statistics. DFU, except for the wells used as blind-tests, are a perfect match between prior and posterior, because they were used as hard constraints at the well location. This is not the case for MFU, whose small deviations are observed between prior and posterior proportions. superimposition between MFU units is larger than the DFU pattern. One of the aims is solve this ambiguity through MCMC simulations and several iterations, producing a numerous amount of possible MFU occurrence volumes constrained to the seismic data in decametric scale. The general behavior observed concentrates more MFU1 in higher PI values and MFU8 in lower PI values, like the DFU behavior. We chose not to use a constant value for the priori probability in the Bayesian classification, as the facies are highly heterogenous in carbonate environments. Instead, we constructed volumes regarding the laterally variable priori probability for each DFU extrapolating, through ordinary kriging, the facies. In the wells considering horizons and framework. Since there are no wells drilled in structural lows therefore sampling low-energy settings in the study area, we applied a multiplier to raise the prior occurrence probabilities of worse permoporous DFU and MFU away from the Mero main structural high. This behavior is corroborated by numerous presalt analogs that drilled this specific setting Lima and De Ros, 2019 Neves et al., 2019 Gomes et al., 2020 . For each DFU occurrence, there is a prior probability of MFU that corresponds to a mean ratio between its correlated facies obtain from the well data. For example, if DFU1 occurs in a given location, a prior probability for MFU1 is 60 and 40 for MFU2. Fig. 10 exemplifies how a prior probability varies laterally for DFU4, for exemplification, and a prior probability ratio from MFU1 to MFU8 considering the occurrence of each associated DFU. 5.4. Porosity and permeability cosimulation We cosimulated for each PI iteration a numerous quantity of possible f and permeability k volumes, given the MFU distributions calculated by the MCMC inversions. The procedure for the cosimulation is similarto the workflow described in Section 5.1, with the difference that the posterior probability is now coupled with the simulated PI value, there is, we are sampling for P porosity geostat, simPI and P permeability geostat, simPI . It is important to emphasize that the porosity and permeability cosimulation is restricted with the MFU, below the seismic resolution. However, MFU is directly related to a specific DFU that is constrained by seismic data. So, at the end, the porosity and permeability are simulated on the metric scale without losing the seismic lateral control. Through well data analysis and porosity and permeability volumes obtain from the Bayesian classification, the vertical and lateral experimental variograms are like those used to the PI MCMC inversion Figs. 7 and 8 . The porosity and permeability pdfs used for the cosimulation are showed in Fig. 15. As previously shown in Table 2 basic statistics, MFU1 concentrate worse permoporous samples and MFU8 better. We considered a cosimulation for each 5.3. Stochastic seismic inversion results and quality control QC We performed 100 iterations for the MCMC stochastic seismic inversion, that is, 100 possible solutions were calculated for the acoustic impedance, DFU and MFU given the seismic data as constraint. The mean wavelet, necessary for the synthetic seismic convolution, is the same used for the seismic inversion by Penna et al. 2019 . Initially, all the wells with available well-log data were used as hard constrains for the inversion. Then, we removed three wells to blind-tests and performed the inversion. The presented results in this publication are blind-test versions of the MCMC inversion. The mean PI and DFU and MFU most probable occurrence from the 100 iterations, and the results of two random iterations are presented in Fig. 11. Clearly, one notices the relation and distribution of low-PI values as DFU3 and DFU4 and MFU5 to MFU8, while high-PI values tend to concentrate more DFU1 and DFU2 and, consequently, MFU1 to MFU4. Also, we noted how the occurrence of each MFU is conditioned to the occurrence of its correlated DFU. 1712 R. Penna and W.M. Lupinacci Petroleum Science 21 2024 1699e1718 Fig. 16. a Most probable MFU and mean porosity and permeability NW-SE section from 100 cosimulation iterations. b Iteration 13 MFU, porosity and permeability results. c Iteration 42 MFU, porosity and permeability results. 1713 R. Penna and W.M. Lupinacci Petroleum Science 21 2024 1699e1718 Fig. 17. Prior and posterior pdfs and cumulative pdfs for the 100 cosimulations for porosity and permeability. results corroborates the robustness and predictability of the method. A slighter higher amount of errors for MFU then DFU in the blind wells are expected, considering that the simulation constraint is stronger for decametric scale given the seismic vertical resolution characteristics. Thus, it s more reliable to analyze the posterior prior pdfs analysis, once we are trying to mimic the probability distribution of the data. Summarizing, we produced a series of possible PI, DFU, MFU, porosity and permeability volumes through an MCMC inversion and cosimulation, which are laterally compatible with the seismic data and vertically with the well data statistics Fig. 19 . MCMC iteration, that is, 100 possible porosity and permeability solutions were calculated given the input variograms, pdfs and PI volumes. Mean and individual results are displayed in Fig. 16, as well as the corresponding MFU from the related MCMC inversion. In practice, given these results, we can stablish pessimistic, optimistic and base scenarios for the Mero reservoir considering parameters such as net to gross, porous volumes, and volume in place. We also performed the prior and posterior pdfs analysis for the permeability and porosity. As previously shown in the PI QC Fig. 13 , the cosimulation produces results below the seismic resolution that are compatible with the well data statistics, without relevant discrepancies and without losing the seismic constrain in the decametric scale. The pdf comparison is presented in Fig. 17. Also, in Fig. 18, inputs and mean outputs from porosity and permeability are displayed for two blind wells. Overall, the QC 6. Conclusions The proposed workflow provided means to generate numerous 1714 R. Penna and W.M. Lupinacci Petroleum Science 21 2024 1699e1718 Fig. 18. MFU, porosity and permeability estimation QC for two blind wells in the area. Black lines correspond to input data and red lines to output data. accurate porosity and permeability relations and, consequently, a better volumetric distribution of these properties. Due to vertical resolution limitations, the distribution of MFU is not constrained by the seismic data, being dependent exclusively on the simulation method used. This can lead to some calculation errors that falls along any method of lateral extrapolation of discrete and continuous properties chosen. However, we tried to address this problem constraining the calculation of MFU with the occurrence of DFU. In this decametric scale the seismic can constrain the results, minimizing some of the large errors that could occur. We strongly recommend that some uncertainty analysis be performed through the probabilistic outputs of the workflow. We believe that interpretation of scenarios based on the volumes generated by the proposed methodology e.g. P10, P50 and P90 will positively impact the static and dynamic model building process, as well as 4D seismic interpretation and seismic assisted history matching. possible porosity and permeability 3D volumes below the seismic resolution limit, respecting the seismic data in decametric scale. Like many seismic Bayesian inference algorithms, the prior information plays an important role in the posterior distribution of PI and, consequently, porosity and permeability. We highly recommended that prior models are built representing local geology aspects or its analogs, constraining some characteristics that sometimes are not sampled even in the presence of numerous wells. That is the case of prior and posterior pdfs for MFU1 and MFU2, which the prior information volume forces the occurrence of worse permoporous facies clay-rich carbonates in structural lows, causing a deviation of posterior pdf towards low-PI values. These carbonates were not drilled by wells, once they are below the O W contact. However, several analog data from other presalt reservoirs indicate the presence of such facies. Even in the presence of high MFU superimposed zones in the acoustic domain, our workflow achieved a satisfactory posterior blind-well proportion. This issue can be addressed by generating a sufficient number of iterations and constraining MFU with its corresponding DFU, guaranteeing the seismic correlation at larger scales. As shown in previous studies, DFU presents a reduced amount of elastic and acoustic superimposition and can be quantified in terms of deterministic inversion and Bayesian probabilistic classification. However, the presence of noise and imaging problems in the seismic can propagate errors in the decametric scale to metric scale, causing porosity and permeability deviations. Understanding flow behavior at decametric scale is the first step to build the dynamic reservoir knowledge at smaller scales, but detailed analysis can be performed with much more accuracy in the metric scale. In complex reservoir settings, where the fluid flow is inflected by numerous processes, it is important to have more flow units to correctly characterize the flow behavior, producing more CRediT authorship contribution statement Rodrigo Penna Writing e review editing, Writing e original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Wagner Moreira Lupinacci Validation, Supervision, Project administration. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 1715 R. Penna and W.M. Lupinacci Petroleum Science 21 2024 1699e1718 Fig. 19. a MFU mode map from the upper Barra Velha Formation. b Porosity and c permeability minimum, maximum and mean maps from the same stratigraphic layer. 1716 R. Penna and W.M. Lupinacci Petroleum Science 21 2024 1699e1718 Acknowledgements Challenges and solutions of geostatistical inversion for reservoir characterization of the Supergiant Lula Field. Petroleum Geostatistics 1e5. https doi.org 10.3997 2214-4609.201902176, 2019. Kozeny, J., 1927. Ueber kapillare Leitung des Wassers im Boden. Sitzungsber Akad 136 2a , 271e306. Leite, C., de Assis Silva, C.M., de Ros, L.F., 2020. Depositional and diagenetic processes in the presalt rift section of a Santos Basin area, SE Brazil. J. Sediment. Res. 90 6 , 584e608. https doi.org 10.2110 jsr.2020.27. Li, P., Zheng, M., Bi, H., Wu, S., Wang, X., 2017. Pore throat structure and fractal characteristics of tight oil sandstone a case study in the Ordos Basin, China. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 149, 665e674. https doi.org 10.1016 j.petrol.2016.11.015. Lima, B.E.M., De Ros, L.F., 2019. Deposition, diagenetic and hydrothermal processes in the Aptian Presalt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs of the northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Sediment. Geol. 383, 55e81. https doi.org 10.1016 j.sedgeo.2019.01.006. Liu, Y., Liu, Y., Zhang, Q., Li, C., Feng, Y., Wang, Y., Xue, Y., Ma, H., 2019. Petrophysical static rock typing for carbonate reservoirs based on mercury injection capillary pressure curves using principal component analysis. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 181, 106175. https doi.org 10.1016 j.petrol.2019.06.039. Mahjour, S.K., Al-Askari, M.K.G., Masihi, M., 2016. Identification of flow units using methods of Testerman statistical zonation, flow zone index, and cluster analysis in Tabnaak gas field. J. Pet. Explor. Prod. Technol. 6 4 , 577e592. https doi.org 10.1007 s13202-015-0224-4. Mirzaei-Paiaman, A., Ostadhassan, M., Rezaee, R., Saboorian-Jooybari, H., Chen, Z., 2018. A new approach in petrophysical rock typing. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 166, 445e464. https doi.org 10.1016 j.petrol.2018.03.075. Moczydlower, B., Pacifico, F., Pizarro, J., 2019. Libra extended well test e an innovative approach to de-risk a complex field development. In Presented at the Offshore Technology Conference. Houston, Texas, USA, 6-9 May 2019. Moreira, J.L.P., Madeira, C.V., Gil, J.A., e Machado, M.A.P., 2007. Bacia de Santos. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 15 2 , 531e549. Nabawy, B.S., Basal, A.M.K., Sarhan, M.A., Safa, M.G., 2018. Reservoir zonation, rock typing and compartmentalization of the tortonian-serravallian sequence, temsah gas field, offshore nile delta, Egypt. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 92, 609e631. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2018.03.030. Neves, I.A., Lupinacci, W.M., Ferreira, D.J.A., Zambrini, J.P.R., Oliveira, L.O.A., Olho Azul, M., Ferrari, A.L., Gamboa, L.A.P., 2019. Presalt reservoirs of the Santos Basin cyclicity, electrofacies, and tectonic-sedimentary evolution. Interpretation 7, SH33eSH43. https doi.org 10.1190 INT-2018-0237.1. Oliveira, L., Rancan, C.C., Sartorato, A.C.L., Farias, F.A., Pereira, E., 2021. Drowning unconformities on presalt carbonate platforms e examples from the Itapema Formation lower cretaceous , Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. In Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 577, 110570. https doi.org 10.1016 j.palaeo.2021.110570. Pec anha, A.A., Lupinacci, W.M., Ferreira, D.J.A., Freire, A.F.M., 2019. A workflow for reservoir characterization applied to presalt coquinas from the Linguado Field, Campos Basin, Brazil. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 183, 106451. https doi.org 10.1016 j.petrol.2019.106451. Penna, R., Arau jo, S., Geisslinger, A., Sansonowski, R., Oliveira, L., Rosseto, J., Matos, M., 2019. Carbonate and igneous rock characterization through reprocessing, FWI imaging, and elastic inversion of a legacy seismic data set in Brazilian presalt province. Lead. Edge 38 1 , 11e19. https doi.org 10.1190 tle38010011.1. Penna, R., Lupinacci, W.M., 2020. Decameter-scale flow-unit classification in Brazilian presalt carbonates. SPE Reservoir Eval. Eng. 23 4 , 1420e1439. https doi.org 10.2118 201235-pa. Penna, R., Lupinacci, W.M., 2021. 3D modelling of flow units and petrophysical properties in Brazilian presalt carbonate. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 124, 104829. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2020.104829. Nunes, R., Azevedo, L., Guerreiro, L., Soares, A., 2017. Geostatistical Pereira, A., seismic inversion for frontier exploration. Interpretation 5 4 , T477eT485. https doi.org 10.1190 int-2016-0171.1. Rastegarnia, M., Sanati, A., Javani, D., 2016. A comparative study of 3D FZI and electrofacies modeling using seismic attribute analysis and neural network technique a case study of Cheshmeh-Khosh Oil field in Iran. Petroleum 2 3 , 225e235. https doi.org 10.1016 j.petlm.2016.06.005. Rocha, H.O., da Costa, J.L.S., Carrasquilla, A.A.G., Carrasco, A.M.V., 2019. Petrophysical characterization using well log resistivity and rock grain specific surface area in a fractured carbonate presalt reservoir in the Santos Basin, Brazil. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 183, 106372. https doi.org 10.1016 j.petrol.2019.106372. Saussus, D., Sams, M., 2012. Facies as the key to using seismic inversion for modelling reservoir properties. First Break 30 7 . https doi.org 10.3997 13652397.2012009. Sams, M., Millar, I., Satriawan, W., Saussus, D., Bhattacharyya, S., 2011. Integration of geology and geophysics through geostatistical inversion a case study. First Break 29 8 . https doi.org 10.3997 1365-2397.2011023. Sartorato, A.C.L., Tonietto, S.N., Pereira, E., 2020. Silicification and dissolution features in the brazilian Presalt Barra Velha formation impacts in the reservoir quality and insights for 3D geological modeling. Rio Oil and Gas Expo and Conference 20, 68e69. https doi.org 10.48072 2525-7579.rog.2020.068. lez, M., 2017. Accurate Velocity Model RefineSeifert, I., Penna, R., Maul, A., Gonza ment through the Use of Acoustic Impedance for Evaporite Seismic Facies Differentiation of Presalt Reservoir Prospects in Santos Basin. 15th International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society EXPOGEF, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. https doi.org 10.1190 sbgf2017-351, 31 July-3 August 2017. The authors thank the Petrobras Libra JPT project and partners Shell, Total, CNOOC and CNPC for the data availability. We kindly o, Vitor appreciate Petrobras s Camilla Almeida, Marcos Sebastia Luis Souza, Rodolfo Victor, Antonio Carlos NasciMello, Andre mento, Leonardo Teixeira, Alexandre Maul and Shell s Louis Sturgess and Wences Gouveia for the technical support and discussions. References Al-Ajmi, F.A., Holditch, S.A., 2000. Permeability estimation using hydraulic flow units in a central arabia reservoir. In SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition. https doi.org 10.2118 63254-ms. Amaefule, J.O., Altunbay, M., Tiab, D., Kersey, D.G., Keelan, D.K., 1993. Enhanced reservoir description using core and log data to identify hydraulic flow units and predict permeability in uncored intervals wells. In SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition. https doi.org 10.2118 26436-ms. Araujo, S., Gouveia, W.P., 2015. Improved Presalt Imaging from Post-salt HighResolution Velocity Updates. 14th International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society EXPOGEF, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. https doi.org 10.1190 sbgf2015-215, 3-6 August 2015. Azevedo, L., Soares, A., 2018. Geostatistical methods for reservoir geophysics by Azevedo, L. and Soares, A. Math. Geosci. 50 7 , 861e863. https doi.org 10.1007 s11004-018-9748-8. Buckley, J.P., Bosence, D., Elders, C., 2015. Tectonic setting and stratigraphic architecture of an early cretaceous lacustrine carbonate platform, sugar loaf high, Santos Basin, Brazil. Geological Society, London, Special Publications 418 1 , 175e191. https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.13. Carlotto, M.A., da Silva, R.C.B., Yamato, A.A., Trindade, W.L., Moreira, J.L.P., Fernandes, R.A.R., Ribeiro, O.J.S., Gouveia, W.P., Carminati, J.P., Qicai, D., Junfeng, Z., da Silva-Telles, A.C., 2017. Libra a newborn giant in the brazilian presalt province. In In Giant Fields of the Decade 2000e2010. The American Association of Petroleum Geologists. https doi.org 10.1306 13572006m1133685. Deutsch, C.V., Journel, A.G., 1997. GSLIB Geostatistical Software Library andUser s Guide, second ed. Oxford University Press, New York. Doyen, P., 2007. Seismic Reservoir Characterization an Earth Modelling Perspective EET 2 . EAGE Publications bv. https doi.org 10.3997 9789073781771. Escobar, I., Williamson, P., Cherrett, A., Doyen, P.M., Bornard, R., Moyen, R., Crozat, T., 2006. Fast geostatistical stochastic inversion in a stratigraphic grid. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts. https doi.org 10.1190 1.2369943. Feng, R., Luthi, S.M., Gisolf, D., 2018. Simulating reservoir lithologies by an actively conditioned Markov chain model. J. Geophys. Eng. 15 3 , 800e815. https doi.org 10.1088 1742-2140 aaa0ff. Ferreira, D.J.A., Lupinacci, W.M., 2018. An approach for three-dimensional quantitative carbonate reservoir characterization in the Pampo field, Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Bull. 102, 2267e2282. https doi.org 10.1306 04121817352. Ghanbarian, B., Lake, L.W., Sahimi, M., 2018. Insights into rock typing a critical study. SPE J. 24 1 , 230e242. https doi.org 10.2118 191366-pa. Gomes, J.P., Bunevich, R.B., Tedeschi, L.R., Tucker, M.E., Whitaker, F.F., 2020. Facies classification and patterns of lacustrine carbonate deposition of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazilian presalt. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 113, 104176. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2019.104176. Gunter, G.W., Finneran, J.M., Hartmann, D.J., Miller, J.D., 1997. Early determination of reservoir flow units using an integrated petrophysical method. In SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition. https doi.org 10.2118 38679-MS. Haas, A., Dubrule, O., 1994. Geostatistical inversionda sequential method of stochastic reservoir modelling constrained by seismic data. First Break 12 11 . https doi.org 10.3997 1365-2397.1994034. Haridy, M.G., Sedighi, F., Ghahri, P., Ussenova, K., Zhiyenkulov, M., 2020. Comprehensive study of the Oda corrected permeability upscaling method. In Day 2 Wed, October 30, 2019. SPE IATMI Asia Pacific Oil Gas Conference and Exhibition. https doi.org 10.2118 196399-MS. Hatampour, A., Schaffie, M., Jafari, S., 2018. Hydraulic flow units estimation from seismic data using artificial intelligence systems, an example from a gas reservoir in the Persian Gulf. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 170, 400e408. https doi.org 10.1016 j.petrol.2018.06.086. Herlinger Jr., R., Zambonato, E.E., De Ros, L.F., 2017. Influence of diagenesis on the quality of lower cretaceous presalt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs from Northern Campos Basin, Offshore Brazil. J. Sediment. Res. 87 12 , 1285e1313. https doi.org 10.2110 jsr.2017.70. Iravani, M., Rastegarnia, M., Javani, D., Sanati, A., Hajiabadi, S.H., 2018. Application of seismic attribute technique to estimate the 3d model of hydraulic flow units a case study of a gas field in Iran. Egyptian Journal of Petroleum 27 2 , 145e157. https doi.org 10.1016 j.ejpe.2017.02.003. Jesus, C., Azul, M.O., Lupinacci, W., Machado, L., 2017. Mapping of carbonate mounds in the Brazilian presalt zone. In SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts. https doi.org 10.1190 segam2017-17789870.1, 2017. Kneller, E., Teixeira, L., Hak, B., Cruz, N.M., Oliveira, T., Cruz, J.M., Cunha, R.S., 2019. 1717 R. Penna and W.M. Lupinacci Petroleum Science 21 2024 1699e1718 London, Special Publications 418 1 , 209e219. Yarmohammadi, S., Kadkhodaie-Ilkhchi, A., Rahimpour-Bonab, H., Shirzadi, A., 2014. Seismic reservoir characterization of a deep water sandstone reservoir using hydraulic and electrical flow units a case study from the Shah Deniz gas field, the South Caspian Sea. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 118, 52e60. https doi.org 10.1016 j.petrol.2014.04.002. Zhang, P., Zhang, J., Wang, J., Li, M., Liang, J., Wu, Y., 2018. Flow units classification for geostatisitical three-dimensional modeling of a non-marine sandstone reservoir a case study from the Paleocene Funing Formation of the Gaoji Oilfield, east China. Open Geosci. 10 1 , 113e120. https doi.org 10.1515 geo2018-0009. Soares, A., 2001. Direct sequential simulation and cosimulation. Math. Geol. 33 8 , 911e926. https doi.org 10.1023 a 1012246006212. Soares, A., Diet, J.D., Guerreiro, L., 2007. Stochastic inversion with a global perturbation method. In EAGE Conference on Petroleum Geostatistics. EAGE Conference on Petroleum Geostatistics. https doi.org 10.3997 22144609.201403048. Tiab, D., Donaldson, E.C., 2004. Petrophysics Theory and Practice of Measuring Reservoir Rock and Fluid Transport Properties. Gulf Professional Publishing. Wheeler, H., 1958. Time-stratigraphy. AAPG Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull. 42 5 , 1047e1063. https doi.org 10.1306 0bda5af2-16bd-11d7-8645000102c1865d. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2015. An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates. Geological Society, 1718

[END_OF_PAPER]

Journal of South American Earth Sciences 118 2022 103947 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of South American Earth Sciences journal homepage www.elsevier.com locate jsames Seismic stratigraphic framework and seismic facies of the Aptian Pre-salt Barra Velha Formation in the Tupi Field, Santos Basin, Brazil Vitor P. Sommer a, , Juliano Kuchle a, b, Luiz F. De Ros a, b a Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Programa de Po s-Graduac a o em Geocie ncias, Instituto de Geocie ncias, Av. Bento Gonc alves 9500, Porto Alegre, RS, 91509900, Brazil b Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Instituto de Geocie ncias, Av. Bento Gonc alves 9500, Porto Alegre, RS, 91509-900, Brazil A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T Keywords Carbonate reservoir Pre-salt Barra Velha formation Tupi field Seismic-stratigraphic framework The discovery of giant oil accumulations in the Pre-salt sag section of the Santos Basin has attracted huge interest in the lacustrine carbonate deposits of the Aptian Barra Velha Formation. Although for the significant volume of publications on the Pre-salt section, there is still limited understanding of its tectono-stratigraphic evolution, and lack of a coherent published stratigraphic framework for the Tupi Field, the largest and most productive Pre-salt accumulation. This work aims to define a seismic-stratigraphic framework in the Aptian Presalt interval of the Tupi Field, using 19 seismic lines, and photomicrographs of thin sections from 13 wells. Four seismic units SU1, SU2, SU3, and SU4 and two seismic facies SFA and SFB were identified. The depositional pattern of the seismic units is of a continuous expansion of the accommodation space, although with significant erosion at the top of SU4. SFA is composed mostly of calcite spherulites and Mg-clays mud, which constitutes the background of lacustrine sedimentation preferentially formed and or preserved in relatively deeper areas. SFB corresponds to crusts of fascicular calcite shrubs preferentially precipitated in relatively higher areas, and to intraclastic deposits of reworked spherulites and shrubs. The Pre-Alagoas unconformity represents the base of the study interval. The top is characterized by a regional unconformity which represents a temporal gap between the youngest of the units SU4 and the start of the evaporitic deposits of the Ariri Formation. No additional un conformities were identified within the Barra Velha Formation in the Tupi Field, characterizing a continuously expansive deposition on a flat, tabular and onlapping pattern upon the Outer High, as a product of continuous accommodation creation, under low tectonic activity. The predominant post-depositional configuration, together with the continuity and onlap patterns of seismic units onto a remanent high, support a shallow evaporitic lake model, rather than a deep lake with microbial platforms for the Tupi Field area. 1. Introduction The main petroleum fields of Brazil produce from the Pre-salt section of the Santos Basin ANP, 2021 . The origin of these deposits is related to the Gondwana supercontinent breakup and the resulting opening of the South Atlantic Ocean during Early Cretaceous. The Santos Basin extends through approximately 350,000 Km2 of the southeastern Brazilian coast, with up to 10 Km infill in its depocenter Chang et al., 2008 . The study area is located in the Tupi Field of Santos Basin, around 230 Km offshore from the Rio de Janeiro coast, eastern Brazilian margin Fig. 1 . The interval of interest is between 4700 and 6000 m beneath sea level, below more than 2000 m of water column and up to 2000 m of salt column ANP, 2018 . Tupi Field is not only the largest 1875 Km2 , but also the main oil producer in Brazil, with an average daily production of 948,076 bbl Assine et al., 2008 . The main objectives of this work are 1 to provide a seismicstratigraphic framework to the Aptian Barra Velha Formation BVF in the Tupi Field, comprising seismic units and surfaces, and their recog nition patterns and geological significance 2 to define seismic facies by combining seismic textures with petrographic characteristics, in order to propose 3 a geological evolution model for the BVF in the area. We hope that these results and interpretations may contribute to the exploration of other areas in the pre-salt province, as well as to in crease the recovery efficiency from the producing fields. Corresponding author. E-mail addresses vitorpsommer gmail.com V.P. Sommer , juliano.kuchle ufrgs.br J. Kuchle , lfderos inf.ufrgs.br L.F. De Ros . https doi.org 10.1016 j.jsames.2022.103947 Received 2 May 2022 Received in revised form 21 July 2022 Accepted 25 July 2022 Available online 5 August 2022 0895-9811 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. V.P. Sommer et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 118 2022 103947 2. Geological setting widely, from the Santos south to the Pernambuco north basins, and also along their African basins counterparts Dias, 1998 Karner and Driscoll, 1999 Rangel and Carminatti, 2000 Unternehr et al., 2010 Lentini et al., 2010 Saller et al., 2016 . The transition from a lacustrine to a marine environment corresponded to a change from the chemical deposits of magnesian clays and calcite of the BVF to the evaporites of the Late Aptian Ariri Formation Pereira and Feijo , 1994 . The evapo ration rate promoted the deposition of up to 3,0 km thick salt layers Chang et al., 1990 Pereira and Macedo, 1990 . Thus, the main Pre-salt reservoirs of the BVF are composed of carbonate rocks, which seal cor responds mostly to halite and anhydrite of the Ariri Formation. The Tupi Field was discovered in 2006 by a Petrobras consortium with Petrogal and Shell. The study interval corresponds to the carbonate Middle to Late Aptian Barra Velha Formation Fig. 2 . This unit was deposited in a geological context of regional thermal subsidence, char acteristic of the so-called sag section of the basin. This condition developed after the mechanical subsidence of the rift section ceased, as final crustal adjustments preceding the effective continental breakup took place Karner and Driscoll, 1999 Karner and Gamboa, 2007 . The rift section is divided into two phases, sin-rift I and II Chang et al., 1992 Karner and Driscoll, 1999 . Syn-rift I phase represents the economic basement of the basin, composed of volcanic rocks of the Hauterivian Camboriu Formation. Syn-rift II phase is characterized by a fluvial-lacustrine environment, responsible for the deposition of organic matter-rich sediments from the Barremian Pic arras Formation, main pre-salt source rocks, and the bioclastic carbonates of the Early Aptian Itapema Formation Karner and Driscoll, 1999 Chang et al., 2008 . The sag section Brumbaugh et al., 1994 Henry et al., 1995 Quirk et al., 2013 , also called the sin-rift III Chang et al., 1992 , or the transitional section Pereira and Feijo , 1994 , is characterized by a large and laterally continuous regional depression, generated predominantly by thermal subsidence. The evaporitic deposition of this phase was controlled by the presence of volcanic highs Sa o Paulo dorsal , which restricted the circulation of seawater from the south, and by a hot and dry climate Demercian, 1996 . This sag basin seems to have extended 3. Materials and methods This work was developed using 19 2D seismic lines, of large regional size, from the 0258 2D SPEC BM S survey. These lines are final migrated, zero-phase, two-way travel time, without depth conversion. The seismic attributes used for seismic facies definition were the Rela tive Acoustic Impedance and Cosine of Phase. A set of 13 exploratory wells, all with checkshots, was used to verify the lithologic correspon dence of the recognized seismic intervals. Photomicrographs of repre sentative thin sections from sidewall samples were selected for the identification of the characteristic Pre-salt lithological types. Conven tional well logs, such as gamma-ray, resistivity, sonic dT, and density present no significant differentiation within the interval and thus were not used to characterize the seismic facies. All the data were made Fig. 1. A Location map of the Santos basin. B Location map of the study area with 2D seismic lines and wells studied. Data from Geodata ANP 2021. All shown seismic panels are within the study area boundary. 2 V.P. Sommer et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 118 2022 103947 Fig. 2. Stratigraphic chart of the rift and post-rift sag sections of the Santos basin. Modified from Moreira et al., 2007 . CAM Camboriu Fm., PIC Pic arras Fm., ITP Itapema Fm., BVE Barra Velha Fm., ARI Ariri Fm. . available by ANP National Petroleum Agency , according to the aca demic data sharing to universities policy orders 10252 and 10253 . The produced maps are on milliseconds TWT two-way travel time , due to the original seismic source. This includes structural maps on vertical TWT based - milliseconds , and time-based thickness millisec onds , also called isochores. Although knowing the limitations of timebased thickness maps, mainly related to the lack of real thickness determination and to the lateral variations in real thickness due to the heterogeneous velocity interval, we still considered such maps useful to locate relative lows, highs, and to allow relative comparisons of regional thickness. We considered this information relevant for areas with limited publication, even with this limitation. The first step in seismic stratigraphic interpretation involved the analysis of reflectors and their terminations, classified in toplap, downlap, onlap, and erosional truncation Fig. 3B . The analysis of those terminations allowed identifying the surfaces with the most significant chronological meaning, which define the seismic stratigraphic units Mitchum Jr. et al., 1977 . In addition, the analysis of the geometric patterns, as amplitude, continuity, and frequency configurations of the reflectors, were used to determine the seismic facies. This methodology was first established by Vail and Mitchum et al. 1977 based on passive margins, where the base level sea level is Fig. 3. Summary chart for reflector termination analysis. A The general interpretation of reflectors from seismic 0575 with zoomed-in sections 1 2 . B Schematic interpretation of reflectors terminations. C Detailed view of types of reflector terminations found. i erosional truncation, ii toplap, iii downlap, and iv onlap. 3 V.P. Sommer et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 118 2022 103947 controlled by the relationship between accommodation space tectonics and eustatic mechanisms of subsidence and uplift and sedimentary influx. However, the study interval was developed in a continental breakup system in which the base level is related to the lake level Vieira, 1998 . Further, Nichols 2009 observed that level variations of intracratonic lakes without connection to the sea was controlled by climate changes, what makes such level change cycles more frequent. A systematic mapping of reflectors terminations was performed in four seismic lines through the entire sag interval. In this particular section Fig. 3A the reflectors have good traceability at all depth levels, although lateral continuity decreases towards the southeast. The am plitudes are variable, and the biggest values are concentrated in the upper central region. Although the filling concordant with the top and base surfaces indicates tabular deposition in the interval, an apparently irregular pattern is related to the disturbance of the seismic response below the thick evaporitic package. configuration of the sag phase. This unconformity is well-known in the Brazilian margin basins, and is called the Pre-Alagoas unconformity Karner, 2000 Moreira et al., 2007 , and it defines the base of the BVF. On the seismic lines, this surface has a high positive amplitude, and presents top erosional truncations of underlying reflections syn-rift at SE. However, the concordant reflections predominate Fig. 3A . The top surface is located between the BVF and the Ariri Formation. This surface is easily identified, because it is marked by a highly positive amplitude reflector originated from the acoustic impedance contrast between the thick salt package of the Ariri Formation, at the top, and the underlying carbonates of the BVF Fig. 3A . The reflectors terminations against this surface are mainly erosional truncations Fig. 3C i , with concordant pattern in some areas, defining an unconformity at the top of the BVF and base of the Ariri Formation evaporites. This unconformity was also recognized by Assine et al. 2008 . Both surfaces show a good match with the lithostratigraphic tops in the wells. No significant thickening was recognized within the BVF, indicating low tectonic activity during deposition. The three-dimensional visualization of the Pre-Alagoas unconfor mity Fig. 4A and of the top surface Fig. 4B indicates the geomor phological similarities between them. Thus, the reminiscent morphology that controlled the deposition of the sag section has not changed during that time. The isochronous map of the top and base 4. Results 4.1. Top and base of interval The basal surface of the study interval is an unconformity that sep arates the divergent configuration of the rift phase from the parallel Fig. 4. 3D view of A the Pre-Alagoas unconformity, and B the top surface of the Barra Velha Formation in the study area. C Structural maps of basal and top surfaces on TWT ms , and D Isochore map of the entire Barra Velha Formation ms . 4 V.P. Sommer et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 118 2022 103947 surfaces Fig. 4C shows that the central zone is shallower than the external zone on SEE . In addition, the Outer High Gomes et al., 2002 Fainstein et al., 2003 Carminatti et al., 2008 is shown in the top surface map, oriented SW-NE along the SEE zone, which exerted an important control on the depositional pattern of the BVF. The thickness map of the entire BVF Fig. 4D corroborates with the previous figures, providing that the thicker areas are located mostly at the center, with a trend aligned to the Outer High and high values situated in the SW part of the study area. This indicates also that the Outer High was already estab lished before the deposition of the BVF, which it controlled since the initial deposition. 4.3. Seismic units Tracking successive reflector terminations on specific surfaces allowed the characterization of three seismic surfaces SS that separate four seismic stratigraphic units, from Seismic unit 1 SU1 , the oldest, to Seismic unit 4 SU4 Fig. 5 . Seismic stratigraphic units are depositional units related to different temporal events Brown and Fischer, 1977 . Occasionally, they are separated by unconformities surfaces, but they can also mark only successive depositional events, without changes in patterns and trends. SU1 distribution is restricted to the southwest area, while SU4 was affected by posterior erosional processes that limited its record. Furthermore, isochore maps Fig. 6 were made in time milli seconds, TWT to visualize the relative depth of the first occurrence and relative thickness of every seismic unit, what allowed understanding of the tectonic-sedimentary evolution of the area. SU1 lies upon the Pre-Alagoas unconformity and began its deposition by filling the lower regions of the southwest and limited by the structural high Outer High from central towards the east, but overlying the Outer High in the southeast, which is indicated by onlap terminations. Addi tionally, the Pre-Alagoas unconformity is marked by successive onlaps filling the lows, as well as by restricted downlaps occurring in the highs Fig. 5B i . The top surface is called Seismic Surface 1 and separates SU1 from SU2. It is characterized by toplap terminations and some erosional truncations at the SE Fig. 5B ii . The area of occurrence of SU1 is limited to the southwest, which indicates that the region is the lowest of the study interval. The isochore map Fig. 6A corroborates this, showing that Seismic Unit 1 is thinner on the external areas, while the probable depocenter is situated at the center of the southwest boundary of the study area. The time-thickness values may exceed 240 ms TWT , but their average is around 150 ms TWT . SU2 covers the previous unit and lies upon the Pre-Alagoas uncon formity in the center and northeast areas. Where SU2 lies upon SU1, its basal surface is called Seismic Surface 1. The main reflector terminations against this surface are downlaps Fig. 5B i , which occur in almost all the lines. Its top surface is Seismic Surface 2. The top terminations against this surface are erosional truncations at the center part Fig. 5B 4.2. Reflections terminations Along the 0575 regional seismic line Fig. 3A , the reflections pre dominantly show concordance and parallelism. This indicates a tabular, relatively flat deposition, without prominent syn-depositional differen tial subsidence. Additionally, the thinning of the BVF interval towards SE indicates, together with the successive basal onlaps, a depositional advance towards the basement high Outer High . The main reflector terminations of Line 0575 are downlaps, onlaps, and toplaps, occurring in almost all stratigraphic levels. There is a predominance of onlaps against the topographic highs Fig. 3C iv , mostly upon the PreAlagoas unconformity, which indicates a filling of already defined low areas. Successions of toplaps and downlaps are the most common internally to the interval, mostly in the center of the northwest area Fig. 3A 2 . The concordance of reflectors also occurs internally, but is concentrated in the upper part, near the top surface, with high ampli tude reflectors. Erosional truncations Fig. 3C i are also present, mainly at the upper part of the interval against the salt base , as well as double terminations toplap-downlap. The study interval becomes thinner towards the southeast, where basal reflector terminations are predominantly onlap downlap. Fig. 5. Seismic line 0575 A in normal phase without interpretation, B with the interpretation of reflectors termination and seismic stratigraphic units. B-i Detailed NW part and B-ii detailed SE part. 5 V.P. Sommer et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 118 2022 103947 Fig. 6. Isochore maps of each of the seismic units identified in the study interval. Units are in milliseconds TW . i , and toplaps Fig. 5B at the SW and NE areas. Although it occurs in almost the entire study area, it is restricted by the Outer High, except on the NE to extreme east connection. The time-thickness varies, exceeding 300 ms TWT in some places, but the average is around 150 ms TWT , like in SU1. As seismic unit 1, SU2 is thicker in the southwest region Fig. 6B . SU3, due to the constant rate of expansion in accommodation space, is the first unit to cross the Outer High Fig. 6C . Its basal surface is defined by the top of SU2 SS2 , and by the Pre-Alagoas unconformity upon the Outer High. The basal reflectors terminations against the SS2 are predominantly downlaps with onlaps restricted to lows Fig. 5B ii . Where the basal surface is the Pre-Alagoas unconformity, the termina tions are downlaps outside the Outer High and onlaps on the Outer High. The top surface corresponds to the base of salt, but also to SS3, which separates SU3 from SU4. The reflector terminations against those sur faces are somehow distinctive. Erosional truncations are more common against the base of salt, with few zones of concordance in the center and the SW area Fig. 5B i . Concordance of reflectors is also predominant against the SS3, but with toplap terminations mainly at the SW part Fig. 5B i . The top of the unit is preserved only where SU4 is pre served the rest was eroded. Fig. 6C shows that this unit is the thinnest of the interval, with values of no more than 120 ms TWT . Additionally, SU3 does not show a main depocenter. However, there are some slightly thicker areas in the center and north of the study area, and consistent thinning over the Outer High. SU4 is restricted to the upper center of the seismic lines, and its basal surface is SS3 Fig. 5 . The basal reflectors terminations correspond mainly to onlaps with zones of concordance Fig. 5B i ii . The top surface is the base of salt and is characterized by erosional truncation on the edge and concordance in the center. Its occurrence is limited to the center of the study area, along a north-south trend. The average timethickness is about 100 ms TWT , and the depocenter, located in the northeast, is over 160 ms TWT thick Fig. 6D . The interpretation of the isochore map is very limited, owing to the erosion that affected this 6 V.P. Sommer et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 118 2022 103947 Fig. 7C , with an average of 1500 m in the study area. The spatial arrangement of this seismic facies varies along the study interval, with a tendency of concentration in the lower seismic units SU1 and SU2 Fig. 8A . SFA has no particular external geometry. However, it presents sheet and sheet drape geometries in parts of the seismic sections. Seismic facies B SFB presents continuous reflectors, with high to medium amplitude, with large lateral continuity Fig. 7C , with an average of 3000 m. This seismic facies is dominantly arranged as iso lated bodies with sheet geometry, mainly in the upper seismic units SU3 and SU4, but also in the lower central zone of the study area Fig. 8A . unit and made it a relict. Nevertheless, SU4 is inferred to have been originally deposited throughout the entire study area, due to a pro gressive increase in the accommodation space in the region, and after that strongly eroded. The reflectors show toplap terminations at the top and erosional truncations along the edge of the unit, which is also pre sent on the top of SU3. Many erosional truncations were mapped on a traceable surface, indicating a considerable erosional event between SU4 and the evapo rites of the Ariri Formation. This erosional surface is continuous, eroding much of SU4 in the southeast and northwest regions, as well as part of SU3 in the south and southeast region. The many erosional truncations, their distribution and recurrence, and the vertical erosion define the surface separating the top of SU4 and the base of Ariri Formation evaporites as an at least local unconformity, widespread along the entire Tupi Field area. 4.5. Chronostratigraphic chart A chronostratigraphic chart was built from individualized seismic units, according to the procedures of Vail et al. 1977 and originally proposed by Wheeler 1958 . The observation of their geometries pro vides the paleogeomorphological context of deposition The spatial dis tribution of units shows the architectural arrangement of the deposition system during basin filling, and the stacking of units through their relative age, allowing the perception of the temporal control on depo sition. Thus, the chronostratigraphic diagram facilitates the visualiza tion of the relationship between deposition, erosion, and temporal gaps. No geological time average or individual dating of the stratigraphic units was performed. No internal radiometric isotope datable layers were identified, and biostratigraphic zonation was not the subject of this work. But further analysis may be incorporated increasing the definition of the relative time zones here discussed. The Pre-Alagoas unconformity separates the syn-rift deposits controlled by mechanical subsidence from the sag deposits, controlled by thermal subsidence. As sag basins are formed by a lithospheric rebound Brune et al., 2014 , SU1 represents the beginning of a new generation of accommodation space in the basin. The deposition of the BVF began with the filling of lower areas, controlled by the topography inherited from the rift structures and the Pre-Alagoas unconformity. SU1 deposited above the Pre-Alagoas unconformity and onlapping the Outer High Fig. 8 . SU2 lies above the previous unit, and its deposition is very 4.4. Seismic facies Seismic facies are normally determined as patterns related to archi tectural elements, depositional systems or sedimentary environments, depending on the scale and resolution of the data. Seismic facies are defined by the combination of seismic data and well information, in order to characterize a set of three-dimensional seismic units, comprising groups of reflectors with behavioral parameters that differ from the adjacent units Brown and Fischer, 1977 . In this study, the main types of seismic features applied in the recognition and mapping of seismic facies were i seismic amplitude, ii continuity of reflectors, iii geometry of reflectors, and iv seismic frequency properties. For this, the attribute cosine of phase and trace AGC Amplitude Gain Control were used together with the normal phase to define two seismic facies Fig. 7 . The information obtained from seismic recognition was integrated with well data to build a seismic facies model that allowed correlation with the lithological composition of the BVF in the study area. Seismic facies A SFA comprises discontinuous to semi-continuous reflectors, with low to medium amplitude, and small lateral continuity Fig. 7. Seismic line 0575, illustrating a representative seismic section and the description of the seismic facies defined in the sag interval of the Tupi Field. 7 V.P. Sommer et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 118 2022 103947 Fig. 8. Chronostratigraphic chart of the Barra Velha Formation showing A the general interpretation of the seismic line 0575 with the relationship between seismic units and seismic facies B the seismic units layers and C the chronostratigraphic diagram, indicating the time relationship between depositional events of the seismic units and seismic facies. constituted by a combination of laminations and peloids of magnesian clays dominantly stevensite, kerolite, and saponite with calcite spherulites and feathery fascicular aggregates that replaced, displaced, and encrusted the Mg-clays. The Mg-clays were preferentially dissolved and or replaced by silica, dolomite, and other minerals during further diagenesis. The rocks constituted essentially by laminated magnesian clays, with subordinate amounts of terrigenous silt and clays, and by replacive microcrystalline calcite, dolomite and silica are termed mudstones. Rocks formed mostly by calcite spherulites with variable amounts of intersti tial clays are termed spherulstones. Rocks whose main constituents are fascicular calcite shrubs are termed shrubstones De Ros and Oliveira, in prep. . Frequently intercalated with the in-situ deposits, there are resedi mented deposits constituted by intraclasts of reworked spherulites, fascicular shrubs, laminated clays, and their replacement products. Ex amples of the characteristic Pre-salt lithologies in the study area can be seen in Fig. 9. The best reservoirs are mainly represented by fascicular crusts with growth-framework, inter-aggregate porosity, and by intra clastic calcarenites and calcirudites with interparticle porosity e.g., Herlinger et al., 2017 Wright and Barnett, 2017, 2020 Gomes et al., 2020 Carvalho et al., 2022 . Owing to the magnesian composition of the clays and the lack of potassium in their structure, as well as to their heterogeneous, often intense replacement by calcite, dolomite, and sil ica, conventional petrophysical logs and composite logs based on the description of cuttings are useless to define the lithological types of the Pre-salt deposits. The examination of photomicrographs from five selected cored wells along the study area revealed that the defined seismic facies are not corresponding to the simple distribution-specific lithologies, but rather to different patterns of combination, and to the predominance of certain lithologic types in relation to others. The discontinuous, low-amplitude character of Seismic Facies A Fig. 10 corresponds to a predominance similar to SU1, filling the lows and predominantly onlapping the Outer High. It is possible to say that the expansion rate of accommodation space stayed constant due to similarities seen in Fig. 4C. SU3 is the first to surpass the structural high at NE. It has a broad occurrence in the study area and has many erosional truncations along its top. The up permost unit SU4 is a relict, due to extensive post-depositional erosion, which removed most of it, leaving just thin preserved remnants in the study area. This erosional process occurred before the deposition of the Ariri Formation evaporites. This erosion affected almost all SU4 and a great part of the upper SU3 Fig. 8C . Therefore, it can be inferred that after a progressive increase in the accommodation space from SU1 to SU4, there was a significant uplift and or lake level fall before the precipitation of the Ariri salts. The general interplay between the recognized seismic facies in dicates a complex relation of SFB with SFA. The SFB appears as isolated bodies in all seismic units, but with a stratigraphic control of its occur rence Fig. 8C . They are situated predominantly along the base of SU1, at de center of SU2, as dispersed bodies in SU3, and through most of SU4, particularly at the highs Fig. 8 . 5. Discussion 5.1. Lithologic characteristics of the pre-salt deposits A microbial origin was initially interpreted for the unusual deposits of the Pre-salt Aptian sag section e.g., Carminatti et al., 2008 Terra et al., 2010 Muniz and Bosence, 2015 Sabato Ceraldi and Green, 2017 Carvalho and Fernandes, 2021 . However, extensive and robust evi dence supports their origin as abiotic, chemical deposits, formed in an alkaline lacustrine environment e.g., Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2017, 2020 Herlinger et al., 2017 Lima and De Ros, 2019 Gomes et al., 2020 Pietzsch et al., 2020 Carramal et al., 2022 Carvalho et al., 2022 Wright, 2022 . These works showed that the in situ deposits are 8 V.P. Sommer et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 118 2022 103947 Fig. 9. Photomicrographs of lithologic types characteristic of the defined seismic facies A, B, and C of Seismic Facies A, and D, E, and F of Seismic Facies B. A Spherulstone of heterogeneously coalesced calcite spherulites and Mg clay matrix. Uncrossed polarizers P . B Muddy spherulstone of non-coalesced calcite spherulites in Mg-clay matrix. Crossed polarizers XP . C Mudstone of Mg-clays and terrigenous mud partially replaced by microcrystalline calcite. P . D Shrubstone of heterogeneously coalesced fascicular aggregates with inter-aggregate porosity partially filled by macrocrystalline calcite or clay matrix. XP . E Shrubstone of fascicular aggregates and forms transitional to spherulites, with inter-aggregate spaces filled by blocky dolomite. XP . F Calcarenite of fascicular and spherulitic intraclasts strongly compacted and fractured. P . of the background, muddy deposits, represented by mudstones, muddy spherulstones, and spherulstones Fig. 9 , which dominate the BVF along much of the area, mostly in the basal and middle seismic units SU1 and SU2 Fig. 8C . The deposition and preservation of magnesian clays in relatively deeper areas, and their partial replacement by calcite spherulites, microcrystalline dolomite, calcite, and silica, were favored in the relatively deeper areas of the lacustrine system e.g., Wright and Barnett, 2017, 2020 Herlinger et al., 2017 Lima and De Ros, 2019 Gomes et al., 2020 Carramal et al., 2022 Carvalho et al., 2022 Wright, 2022 . The continuous, high amplitude seismic pattern of Seismic Facies B Fig. 10 corresponds to a predominance of shrubstones among the insitu deposits, and of intraclastic calcarenites and calcirudites reworked from the in-situ deposits Fig. 9 . The predominant distribution of seismic facies B along the upper seismic units SU3 and SU4, and in the relatively higher parts of the study area Fig. 8C , is consistent with the processes interpreted for the genesis of the BVF fascicular and reworked deposits in most of the recent and evidence-supported publications e.g., 9 V.P. Sommer et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 118 2022 103947 Fig. 10. Seismic sections showing lateral and vertical variations of seismic facies, and the location of wells with their corresponding thin sections red . Seismic surfaces SS2 and SS3 separate the seismic units SU2, SU3, and SU4 . 10 V.P. Sommer et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 118 2022 103947 Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2017, 2020 Herlinger et al., 2017 Lima and De Ros, 2019 Gomes et al., 2020 Pietzsch et al., 2020 Carramal et al., 2022 Wright, 2022 . According to these authors, the fascicular shrubs are a product of abiotic calcite precipitation in the relatively higher portions of a wide lacustrine system, owing to supersaturation promoted by evaporation and CO2 degassing. The intraclastic deposits were generated by reworking of the in situ spherulitic and fascicular deposits by waves and or currents, also preferentially in the shallower portions of the lacustrine system. Therefore, the distribution of the defined BVF seismic facies is consistent with the interpreted genesis of their predominant lithologic types, and with the relative depth of the lacustrine system. This, even considering that the in-situ lithologies are not corresponding to purely depositional facies, but rather to the combination of depositional con ditions i.e., the preferential deposition and preservation of magnesian clays matrix in relatively deeper areas , with the eodiagenetic to syn genetic precipitation of calcite fascicular shrubs or spherulites. Furthermore, the genetic processes of the lithologic types predominating in SFB would explain its continuous and high amplitude pattern in the seismic lines, as the shrubstones are, apparently, a product of laterally continuous precipitation of fascicular crusts with coalescing calcite ag gregates and scarce clays, features also exhibited by the redeposited intraclastic calcarenites and calcirudites. Conversely, in the spherul stones of SFA, the calcite aggregates are typically less coalesced, frequently separated by the Mg-clay matrix. These observations and interpretations agree with the detailed quantitative petrographic and petrophysical study of the Tupi Field recently published by Carvalho et al. 2022 . internal unconformities or erosional truncations within the interval. 2. The absent or limited syn-depositional faulting and the remark able regional continuity of the seismic units indicate a very limited tectonic activity during the deposition of the BVF in the area. 3. Based on these conditions, the Outer High seems to be already formed before BVF deposition syn-rift and or during the for mation of the Pre-Alagoas unconformity . Although minor uplift or accommodation creation may have occurred during the sag interval, there was neither major contemporaneous tectonic ac tivity, nor divergent reflection patterns. The deposition of the BVF seismic units occurred in a clear onlapping pattern over the Outer High. 4. A widespread unconformity marks the top of BVF, with several successive erosional truncations. This erosion affects mainly the top of SU4, but also SU3. The deposition of the Ariri Formation evaporites started over this unconformity. 5. This unconformity may indicate a local uplift close to the Outer High or and a general base level fall preceding the large marine transgression, which generated the thick evaporitic deposits. 6. The lithological composition of the BVF is essentially constituted by magnesian clays, calcite spherulites, and fascicular shrubs, but presents very complex facies variations, resulting in patterns in undistinguishable conventional logs. 7. However, a clear differentiation can be made based on seismic texture analysis and seismic attributes, defining two seismic facies SFA and SFB - with distinctive recognition parameters and very complex geometry. 8. In general, SFB occurs as isolated sheet-like zones within SFA, preferentially along the relative highs and in SU4. 9. Lithologic types recognized in five wells along the Tupi Field indicate that the defined seismic facies correspond to patterns of combination and distribution of dominant rock types. 10. Seismic facies A corresponds mostly to calcite spherulites and Mgclays mud deposits, which constitute the background of lacus trine sedimentation, predominant and preferentially preserved in relatively lower areas of the system. 11. Seismic facies B corresponds mostly to crusts of calcite fascicular shrubs, formed as syngenetic to eodiagenetic precipitates, and to resedimented deposits, made of spherulitic and fascicular intraclasts. 12. The complex distribution, both laterally and temporally, between the seismic facies suggests a complex origin, related to the com bination of depositional and diagenetic processes, essentially as a product of chemical, abiotic generation in an alkaline lacustrine environment, and to sublacustrine reworking. 13. The mainly post-depositional configuration of the Tupi Field area, along with the continuity and onlap patterns of seismic units onto a high remaining of post-rift erosion, support a shallow evaporitic lake model, rather than a deep lake with microbial platforms. 5.2. Depositional model for the Barra Velha Formation in the Tupi Field Various authors suggested different models for the deposition of the BVF during the Aptian sag phase. While some interpreted that the BVF was deposited in a large shallow evaporitic lake environment Pietzsch et al., 2018 Wright and Rodriguez, 2018 Wright, 2022 , others defend a deep lacustrine system with microbial platforms Buckley et al., 2015 Faria et al., 2017 Minzoni et al., 2020 . The shallow evaporitic lake model explains most Pre-Salt major structures as product of mainly post-depositional faulting, including local inversion, erosion, and rota tion of onlap terminations. The deep lake model mainly considers the relief at the base of the salt and some clinoforms as prograding structures associated with carbonate platforms and buildups. The mainly post-depositional configuration of the Tupi Field area, along with the continuity and onlap patterns of seismic units onto a high remaining of post-rift erosion, support a shallow evaporitic lake model, rather than a deep lake with microbial platforms. This interpretation is also supported by the detailed petrographic and faciologic study recently published by Carvalho et al. 2022 . In addition to that, there is no evidence or even stratigraphic potential for the BVF carbonate system to develop such buildup structures in the study area. Barnett et al. 2018 proposed a model of subaerial erosion and alluvial gravitational redeposition for the intraclastic BVF deposits. However, the configura tion of BVF seismic facies SFA and SFB with a large distribution of resedimented rocks and lack of subaerial features does not support this model, neither for the Tupi Field, nor for the Bu zios Field Ferreira et al., 2021 , where are the best pre-salt reservoirs. CRediT authorship contribution statement 6. Conclusions Vitor P. Sommer Writing original draft, Visualization, Investi gation, Data curation, Conceptualization. Juliano Kuchle Writing review editing, Visualization, Supervision, Conceptualization. Luis F. De Ros Writing review editing, Validation, Conceptualization. The seismic stratigraphic and seismic facies study of the Barra Velha Formation BVF in the Tupi Field area of the Santos basin revealed that Declaration of competing interest 1. The BVF is formed by four seismic-stratigraphic units SU1 to SU4 corresponding to a generally continuous deposition during the Aptian sag phase. This is indicated by the absence of traceable The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 11 V.P. Sommer et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 118 2022 103947 Data availability Southeast Brazil. Society of Exploration Geophysicists Annual International Meeting, Dallas. Faria, D.L.P., Reis, A.T., Souza, O.G., 2017. Three-dimensional stratigraphic sedimentological forward modeling of an Aptian carbonate reservoir deposited during the sag stage in the Santos basin, Brazil. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 88, 676 695. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2017.09.013. Ferreira, D.J.A., Dutra, H.P.L., Castro, T.M., Lupinacci, W.M., 2021. Geological process modeling and geostatistics for facies reconstruction of presalt carbonates. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 124 14 , 104828. Gomes, J.P., Bunevich, R.B., Tedeschi, L.R., Tucker, M.E., Whitaker, F.F., 2020. Facies classification and patterns of lacustrine carbonate deposition of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos basin, Brazilian pre-salt. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 113, 104 176. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2019.104176. Gomes, P.O., Parry, J., Martins, W., 2002. The Outer High of the Santos Basin, Southern Sa o Paulo Plateau, Brazil Tectonic Setting, Relation to Volcanic Events and Some Comments on Hydrocarbon Potential. In AAPG, Hedberg Conference Hydrocarbon Habitat of Volcanic Rifted Passive Margins , Search and Discovery Article 90022. Henry, S.G., Brumbaugh, W., Cameron, N.R., 1995. Pre-salt Source Rock Development on Brazil s Conjugate Margin West African Examples Abs, 20 24 August 1995. First Latin American Geophysical Conference, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Herlinger Jr., R., Zambonato, E.E., De Ros, L.F., 2017. Influence of diagenesis on the quality of Lower Cretaceous Pre-Salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs from northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. J. Sediment. Res. 87, 1285 1313. https doi.org 10.2110 jsr.2017.70. Karner, G.D., 2000. Rifts of the Campos and Santos basins, southeastern Brazil distribution and timing. In Mello, M.R., Katz, B.J. Eds. , Petroleum Systems of South Atlantic Margins, vol. 73. AAPG Mem, pp. 301 315. Karner, G.D., Driscoll, N.W., 1999. Tectonic and stratigraphic development of the West African and eastern Brazilian Margins insights from quantitative basin modeling. Geological Society, London, Special Publications 153 1 , 11 40. https doi.org 10.1144 gsl.sp.1999.153.01.02. Karner, G.D., Gamboa, L.A.P., 2007. Timing and Origin of the South Atlantic Pre-salt Sag Basins and Their Capping Evaporites, vol. 285. Geological Society, London, Special Pub. V., pp. 15 35 Lentini, M.R., Fraser, S.I., Sumner, H.S., Davies, R.J., 2010. Geodynamics of the central South Atlantic conjugate margins implications for hydrocarbon potential. Petrol. Geosci. 16, 217 229. https doi.org 10.1144 1354-079309-909. Lima, B.E.M., De Ros, L.F., 2019. Deposition, diagenetic and hydrothermal processes in the Aptian Pre-Salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs of the northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Sediment. Geol. 383, 55 81. Minzoni, M., Cantelli, A., Thornton, J., Wignall, B., 2020. Seismic-scale geometries and sequence-stratigraphic architecture of Early Cretaceous syn-post rift carbonate systems, Presalt Section, Brazil. In Hendry, J., Burgess, P., Hunt, D., Janson, X., Zampetti, V. Eds. , Seismic Characterization of Carbonate Platforms and Reservoirs, vol. 509. Geological Society, London, Special Publications. https doi.org 10.1144 SP509-2019-78. Mitchum Jr., R.M., Vail, P.R., Sangree, J.B., 1977 b. Seismic stratigraphy and global changes of sea level. Part 3 relative changes of sea level from coastal onlap. In Payton, C.E. Ed. , Seismic Stratigraphy Applications to Hydrocarbon, vol. 26. AAPG Memoir, pp. 63 81. Moreira, J.L.P., Madeira, C.V., Gil, J.A., Machado, A.P.M., 2007. Bacia de Santos. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras. Rio de Janeiro 15 2 , 531 549. Muniz, M.C., Bosence, D.W.J., 2015. Pre-salt microbialites from the Campos Basin offshore Brazil image log facies, facies model and cyclicity in lacustrine carbonates. Geological Society, London, Special Publications 418 1 , 221 242. https doi.org 10.1144 sp418.10. Nichols, G., 2009. Sedimentology and Stratigraphy. John Wiley and Sons. Pereira, M.J., Feijo , F., 1994. Bacia de Santos. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras. Rio de Janeiro 8 1 , 219 234. Pereira, M.J., Macedo, J.M., 1990. A Bacia de Santos perspectivas de uma nova provi ncia petroli fera na plataforma continental sudeste brasileira. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 4, 3 11. Pietzsch, R., Oliveira, D.M., Tedeschi, L.R., Queiroz Neto, J.V., Figueiredo, M.F., Vazquez, J.C., Souza, R.S., 2018. Palaeohydrology of the Lower Cretaceous pre-salt lacustrine system, from rift to post-rift phase. Santos Basin, Brazil. Paleogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 507, 60 80. Pietzsch, R., Tedeschi, L.R., Oliveira, D.M., Anjos, C.W.D., Vazquez, J.C., Figueiredo, M. F., 2020. Environmental conditions of deposition of the Lower Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin Brazil , based on stable carbon and oxygen isotopes a continental record of pCO2 during the onset of the Oceanic Anoxic Event 1a OAE 1a interval Chem. Geol. 535 https doi.org 10.1016 j.chemgeo.2019.119457, 119457. Quirk, D.G., Hertle, M., Jeppesen, J.W., Raven, M., Mohriak, W.U., Kann, A.D.J., Norgaard, M., Howe, M.J., Hsu, D., Coffey, B., Mendes, M.P., 2013. Rifting, Subsidence and Continental Break-Up above a Mantle Plume in the Central South Atlantic, vol. 369. Geological Society of London, Special Publications, pp. 185 214. Rangel, H.D., Carminatti, M., 2000. Rift lake stratigraphy of the Lagoa Feia formation, Campos basin, Brazil. In Gierlowski-Kordesch, E.H., Kelts, K.R. Eds. , Lake basins through space and time AAPG Stud. Geol. 46, 225 244. Sabato Ceraldi, T., Green, D., 2017. Evolution of the South Atlantic lacustrine deposits in response to Early Cretaceous rifting, subsidence and lake hydrology. In Sabato Ceraldi, T., Hodgkinson, R.A., Backe, G. Eds. , Petroleum Geoscience of the West Africa Margin, vol. 438. Geological Society of London Special Publication, pp. 77 98. The authors are unable or have chosen not to specify which data has been used. Acknowledgment This work is part of the master s research of the first author. We thank the support of the Postgraduate Program in Geosciences of Rio Grande do Sul Federal University, the National Petroleum Agency ANP for access to data, according to the policy of academic data sharing to universities, and CAPES Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Level Personnel of the Ministry of Education for the scholarship granted to the first author. References Assine, M.L., Correa, F.S., Chang, H.K., 2008. Migrac a o de depocentros na Bacia de Santos importa ncia na explorac a o de hidrocarbonetos. Rev. Bras. Geociencias 38 2 . Barnett, A.J., Obermaier, M., Amthor, J., Juk, K., Camara, R., Sharafodin, M., Bolton, M., 2018. Origin and significance of thick carbonate grainstone packages in non-marine successions a case study from the Barra Velha Formation. In Santos Basin. Search and Discovery Article 11116. Adapted from Poster Presentation Given at 2018 AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition. Salt Lake City, Utah. Brown Jr., L.F., Fisher, W.L., 1977. Seismic-Stratigraphic Interpretation of Depositional Systems Examples from Brazilian Rift and Pull-Apart Basins, Seismic Stratigraphy Applications to Hydrocarbon Exploration. Charles E. Payton. Oklahoma, American Association of Petroleum Geologists, pp. 213 248. https doi.org 10.1306 M26490C14. Brumbaugh, B., Cameron, N., Henry, S.G., 1994. A new pre-salt source rock for central West African deep water Abstract. In AAPG Annual Meeting, 12 15 June 1994. Denver, Colorado. Brune, S., Heine, C., Pe rez-Gussinye , M., Sobolev, S.V., 2014. Rift migration explains continental margin asymmetry and crustal hyper-extension. Nat. Commun. https doi.org 10.1038 ncomms5014. Buckley, J.P., Bosence, D., Elders, C., 2015. Tectonic setting and stratigraphic architecture of an early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonate platform, sugar Loaf high, Santos basin, Brazil. Geological Society, London, Special Publications 418 1 , 175 191. https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.13. Carminatti, M., Wolff, B., Gamboa, L., 2008. New exploratory frontiers in Brazil, 19th World petroleum congress, Madrid, Spain. WPC Proceedings. Carramal, N.G., Oliveira, D.M., Cacela, A.S.M., Cuglieri, M.A.A., Rocha, N.P., Viana, S. M., Toledo, S.L.V., Pedrinha, S., De Ros, L.F., 2022. Paleoenvironmental insights from the deposition and diagenesis of Aptian pre-salt magnesium silicates from the Lula field, Santos basin, Brazil. J. Sediment. Res. 92, 12 31. https doi.org 10.2110 jsr.2020.139. Carvalho, M.D., Fernandes, F.L., 2021. Pre-salt depositional system sedimentology, diagenesis, and reservoir quality of the Barra Velha Formation, as a result of the Santos Basin tectono-stratigraphic development. In Mello, Marcio R., Yilmaz, Pinar O., Katz, Barry J. Eds. , The Supergiant Lower Cretaceous Pre-salt Petroleum Systems of the Santos Basin, Brazil AAPG Memoir 124, pp. 121 154. Carvalho, A.M.A., Hamon, Y., Souza Jr., O.G., Carramal, N.G., Collard, N., 2022. Facies and diagenesis distribution in an Aptian pre-salt carbonate reservoir of the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil a comprehensive quantitative approach. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 141, 25. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2022.105708, 105708. Chang, H.K., Kowsmanm, R.O., Figueiredo, A.M.F., 1990. Novos conceitos sobre o desenvolvimento das bacias marginais do leste brasileiro. In Raja Gabaglia, G.P., Milani, E.J. Eds. , Origem e Evoluc a o de bacias sedimentares. Petrobra s, pp. 269 289. Chang, H.K., Kowsmann, R.O., Figueredo, A.M.F., Bender, A.A., 1992. Tectonics and stratigraphy of the East Brazil rift system an overview. Tectonophysics 213, 97 138. Chang, H.K., Assine, M.L., Corre a, F.S., Tinen, J.S., Vidal, A.C., Koike, L., 2008. Sistemas petroli feros e modelos de acumulac a o de hidrocarbonetos na Bacia de Santos. Rev. Bras. Geociencias 38 2-Suplemento , 29 46. De Ros, L.F., Oliveira, D.M., An Operational Classification System for the South Atlantic Pre-salt Rocks. in prep. Demercian, L.S., 1996. A halocinese na evoluc a o do sul da Bacia de Santos do Aptiano ao Cretaceo superior. Dissertac a o de Mestrado, Instituto de Geocie ncias, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul. Dias, J.L., 1998. Ana lise sedimentolo gica e estratigra fica do Andar Aptiano em parte da Margem Leste do Brasil e no Plato das Malvinas considerac o es sobre as primeiras incurso es e ingresso es marinhas do Oceano Atla ntico Sul Meridional. Porto Alegre. Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, p. 208 p. Tese Doutorado . ANP - Age ncia Nacional do Petro leo, e Biocombusti veis, Ga s-Natural, 2018. Anua rio estati stico brasileiro do petro leo, ga s natural e biocombusti veis. Rio de Janeiro, ANP. ANP - Age ncia Nacional do Petro leo, e Biocombusti veis, Ga s-Natural, 2021. Anua rio estati stico brasileiro do petro leo, ga s natural e biocombusti veis. Rio de Janeiro, ANP. Fainstein, R., Jamieson, G.A., Biles, N., Hannan, A., Shelander, D., Krueger, A.C.V.A., 2003. Time-Depth Converted Interpretation of Regional Seismic Maps, Offshore 12 V.P. Sommer et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 118 2022 103947 Po s-Graduac a o em Geocie ncias, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre. Wheeler, H.E., 1958. Time-Stratigraphy. Bull. Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. 42 5 pg. 10471063. Wright, V.P., 2022. The mantle, CO2 and the giant Aptian chemogenic lacustrine carbonate factory of the South Atlantic some carbonates are made, not born. Sedimentology 69, 47 73. https doi.org 10.1111 sed.12835. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2015. An Abiotic Model for the Development of Textures in Some South Atlantic Early Cretaceous Lacustrine Carbonates, vol. 418. Geological Society of London, Special Publications, pp. 209 219. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2017. Critically Evaluating the Current Depositional Models for the Pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, Offshore Brazil. Search and Discovery Article 51439, Adapted from Keynote Address Given at AAPG SEG International Conference and Exhibition. London, England. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2020. The textural evolution and ghost matrices of the Cretaceous Barra Velha Formation carbonates from the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. Facies 66 7 , 18. https doi.org 10.1007 s10347-019-0591-2. Wright, V.P., Rodriguez, K., 2018. Reinterpreting the South Atlantic Pre-Salt microbialite reservoirs petrographic, isotopic and seismic evidence for a shallow evaporitic lake depositional model. First Break 36, 71 77. Saller, A., Rushton, S., Buambua, L., Inman, K., McNeil, R., Dickson, J.A.D., 2016. Presalt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola. AAPG Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull. 100, 1135 1164. Terra, G.J.S., Spadini, A.R., Franc a, A.B., Sombra, C.L., Zambonato, E.E., Juschaks, L.C. S., Arienti, L.M., Erthal, M.M., Blauth, M., Franco, M.P., Matsuda, N.S., Silva, N.G.C., Moretti Jr., P.A., D A vila, R.S.F., Souza, R.S., Tonietto, S.N., Anjos, S.M.C., Campinho, V.S., Winter, W.R., 2010. Carbonate rock classification applied to Brazilian sedimentary basins. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 18 1 , 9 29. Unternehr, P., Peron-Pinvidic, G., Manatschal, G., Sutra, E., 2010. Hyperextended crust in the South Atlantic in search for a model. Petrol. Geosci. 16 https doi.org 10.1144 1354-079309-904. Vail, P.R., Mitchum Jr., R.M., 1977. Seismic stratigraphy and global changes of sea level Part 1 overview. In Payton, C.E. Ed. , Seismic Stratigraphy Applications to Hydrocarbon, vol. 26. AAPG Memoir, pp. 51 52. Vail, P.R., Todd, R.G., Sangree, J.B., 1977. Seismic stratigraphy and global changes of sea level. Part 5 chronostratigraphy significance of seismic reflection. In Payton, C.E. Ed. , Seismic Stratigraphy Applications to Hydrocarbon, vol. 26. AAPG Memoir, pp. 99 116. Vieira, R.A.B., 1998. Ana lise estratigra fica e evoluc a o paleogeogra fica da sec a o Neoaptiana na Porc a o Sul da Plataforma de Sa o Mateus, Bacia do Espi rito Santo, p. 158. Dissertac a o Mestrado em Geocie ncias Instituto de Geocie ncias, Curso de 13

[END_OF_PAPER]

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 507 2018 60 80 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology journal homepage www.elsevier.com locate palaeo Palaeohydrology of the Lower Cretaceous pre-salt lacustrine system, from rift to post-rift phase, Santos Basin, Brazil T Raphael Pietzsch , Daniel M. Oliveira, Leonardo R. Tedeschi, Joa o V. Queiroz Neto, Milene F. Figueiredo, Joselito C. Vazquez, Roge rio Schiffer de Souza Petrobras Research and Development Centre Cenpes , Av. Horacio Macedo 950, Cidade Universitaria, 21941-915 Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil A R T I C LE I N FO A B S T R A C T Keywords Isotope geochemistry Carbonate geochemistry Strontium isotopes Numerical modelling Biostratigraphy Sedimentary basins Large oil accumulation discoveries in the last decade in the pre-salt rock succession off the Brazilian coast aroused renewed interest in carbonate reservoirs, prompting several studies aiming at unravelling the conditions of formation of these rocks. Despite that, there are still many gaps in the knowledge concerning environmental conditions of the deposition of the pre-salt carbonates of Santos Basin, located at the southeastern Brazilian margin. In this study, we present and discuss a new suite of geochemical and biostratigraphic data of the lacustrine rift to post-rift succession broadly correlated with Itapema and Barra Velha Formations of the Santos Basin, whose deposition occurred in the Aptian. The integration of the petrographic, biostratigraphic and geochemical data serves the ultimate purpose of the study, which is to apply the new radiogenic strontium data as a proxy for the reconstruction of the evolution of the lake hydrology associated with the deposition of the carbonates of the Itapema and Barra Velha Formations. These data are integrated into numerical models, whose results bring new ideas on the general hydrologic conditions of the lake system and on its evolution through time. The mass balance calculations indicate that two end-members alone can account as potential sources of Sr to the palaeolake a mafic and a felsic component, respectively. The latter likely contributed with significantly higher fluxes, roughly one to two, and up to four, orders of magnitude higher than the former end-member for most of the depositional history in order to generate the 87Sr 86Sr trends observed in the carbonate rocks. Finally, the results obtained from the integration of the observations with the numerical models point to decreasing fluxes of water with time as contributed from both sources, suggesting that the formation of the deposits became very likely constrained to progressively more evaporitic and alkaline lake waters. These results also open up a new window into the environmental conditions of the interior Gondwana continent immediately prior to the definitive opening of the South Atlantic Ocean. 1. Introduction The geological and environmental conditions during the Early Cretaceous in the interior of the Gondwana continent, which led to the deposition of thick lacustrine carbonate sequences prior to the definitive opening of the South Atlantic Ocean, are not well constrained. The discovery of a giant oil province composed by pre-salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs in the last decade, referred to as the pre-salt of Santos Basin, in the Brazilian southeastern margin, aroused renewed interest to understand the conditions in which these unusual rocks formed, and prompted several studies from industry and academia e.g., Carminatti et al., 2008 Mohriak et al., 2012 Sabato Ceraldi and Green, 2016 Carlotto et al., 2017 Faria e al., 2017 Amthor et al., 2018 Arienti et al., 2018 Fetter et al., 2018 Souza et al., 2018 Tosca et al., 2018 Tritlla et al., 2018 . Since the first works addressing the Aptian pre-salt rocks from Campos and later from Santos basins several geological models have been proposed Dias, 2005 Wright, 2012 Dorobek et al., 2012 Harris et al., 2012 Hamon et al., 2012 Rezende and Pope, 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2015 Muniz and Bosence, 2015 Herlinger et al., 2017 Arienti et al., 2018 Fetter et al., 2018 Souza et al., 2018 . These have mostly proposed conceptual models or analogues based on texture, sedimentological, stratigraphic or mineralogical aspects that have been detailed so far. In the recent literature, greater emphasis has been given to the Santos Basin uppermost pre-salt succession Barra Velha Formation , whereas the lowermost coquinas sequence of Campos Basin has received some attention as well Silva-Telles et al., 1994 SilvaTelles, 1996 Dias, 1998 Carvalho et al., 2000 Dias, 2005 Thompson Corresponding author. E-mail address pietzsch petrobras.com.br R. Pietzsch . https doi.org 10.1016 j.palaeo.2018.06.043 Received 5 January 2018 Received in revised form 27 June 2018 Accepted 27 June 2018 Available online 10 July 2018 0031-0182 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 507 2018 60 80 R. Pietzsch et al. Esp 125 Ma E. Aptian i rito San to B asin Vito ria 20 S Es p Ca i rito mp Sa os nto Ba Ba sin sin Rio de Janeiro Sa o Paulo sin Ba in s os mp Ba Ca ntos Sa Luanda Well S10 Site Namibe Santos Basin Pelotas Basin Lake Tanganyika at the same scale 30 S 0 10 100 km Modern continental margins Basin limits Southeastern Brazilian margin salt basins Modern-day area of Lake Tanganyika Fig. 1. Palaeoreconstruction of the Central South Atlantic segment during the Aptian modified from Torsvik et al., 2009 , showing the position of offshore Petrobras well S10. Outline of the salt basins of Campos, Santos and Espi rito Santo is shown in gray. Only the Brazilian salt margins are portrayed their African counterpart is omitted. The box in the lower-right corner shows the area corresponding to the Lake Tanganyika in blue the largest modern-day rift lake in the world, after the Baikal in Siberia , rotated and projected to scale with the map, for size comparison. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. has evolved since then. Their relevance to biostratigraphic dating is generally based on the assumption of the broad dispersal of their eggs from one water body to another, as their capability of resisting dryness and wind transport is well documented Whatley, 1992 . Moreover, the improvement of taxonomic studies allowed biostratigraphers nowadays to be capable of identifying which species are suitable for relative dating based on their abundance, and on ease to find them in different Brazilian basins Do Carmo et al., 2008 Poropat and Colin, 2012b . Radiogenic strontium isotopes, in turn, have been extensively applied to the study of marine carbonate successions for stratigraphic correlation and palaeoenvironmental reconstruction. Nonetheless, less often, they have also been employed with success to the study of carbonates deposited in continental settings such as lakes e.g., Rhodes et al., 2002 Gierlowski-Kordesch et al., 2008 and, as put by Doebbert et al. 2014 , strontium isotopes can be exceptionally sensitive indicators of lacustrine evolution. Arguably, they can provide a record of weathering and or regional drainage patterns, as well as be a reliable tracer of fluid sources. In this study, we present and discuss a new suite of 87Sr 86Sr and biostratigraphic data of the lacustrine rift to post-rift sag successions of the Santos Basin, comprising essentially carbonate rocks with minor associated detrital siliciclastic content, from offshore Petrobras well S10. These data are interpreted with the support of additional et al., 2015 Armelenti et al., 2016 . However, to date only a few have addressed in detail geochemical data sets derived from comprehensive rock sequences from these areas, and studies have been mostly concentrated on Campos Basin e.g., Dias, 1998 Sabato Ceraldi and Green, 2016 Tedeschi, 2017 . So far, an integrated approach for the study of the palaeoenvironmental conditions during the deposition of the presalt rocks of the Santos Basin, considering biostratigraphy, petrography, sedimentology and geochemistry, and covering a significant stratigraphic record, has not been published yet. The biostratigraphy of the pre-salt is essentially based on nonmarine ostracods, because of the lack of marine fauna in these sequences. Ostracods are aquatic crustaceans, commonly found in different kinds of marine and non-marine water bodies, from the early Cambrian until the Recent Pokorny , 1998 . The ostracods studied herein compose the non-marine group, which experienced an abundance and diversity explosion during the Lower Cretaceous Whatley, 1992 . Among the first biostratigraphers to study the Brazilian Lower Cretaceous biostratigraphy were the Dane Johannes Christian Troelsen and the German Karl Kro mmelbein. As a consequence of their work for the oil industry at the time in the 1960s and 1970s , most of their biostratigraphic charts and reports remain classified and are inaccessible to a significant portion of the scientific community. The importance of non-marine ostracods as a biostratigraphic tool 61 Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 507 2018 60 80 R. Pietzsch et al. GEOCHRONOLOGY 110 STAGE LOCAL OSTRACOD SUB Group STAGE ZONES ZONES Albian Formation FLORIANO POLIS PERIOD EPOCH SANTOS BASIN STRATIGRAPHY CAMBURI Ma Unconformities GUARUJA 010 Jiquia Barremian BARRA VELHA 011 1100 1000 009 008 Buracica 007 1020 1010 3 2 1 3 1 4 2 GUARATIBA Aptian Alagoas EARLY 120 CRETACEOUS ARIRI INTRA ALAGOAS PRE-ALAGOAS ITAPEMA PIC ARRAS TOP OF BASALT 130 Aratu Hauterivian CAMBORIU Fig. 2. Lower Cretaceous stratigraphy of Santos Basin adapted from Moreira et al., 2007 and ostracod biozones from Campos Basin modified from Silva-Telles, 1992, 1996 Rangel and Carminatti, 2000 Poropat and Colin, 2012b . Campos and Santos is shown. The comparison is worthwhile because the Tanganyika is today the largest rift lake in the world after Lake Baikal in Siberia, in depth and by lake volume Burnett et al., 2011 , and differently from the latter occupies a latitudinal position that is similar to that assumed for the pre-salt lacustrine system. This comparison also puts into perspective how a modern rift lake might have been embedded within the pre-salt area, and shows how large the actual lake system extended. According to Moreira et al. 2007 , the basement rocks of Santos Basin can be distinguished in two groups. One consists of the crystalline basement, which crops out onshore in the region of the Sa o Paulo state i.e. Serra do Mar mountain range and is composed mainly by Precambrian granitoids and gneisses. The other group represents the economic basement, corresponding to the basalts of the Camboriu Formation, which lay unconformably over the Precambrian basement. These basalts are considered stratigraphically equivalent to the Cabiu nas tholeiitic basalts of the Campos Basin to the north, which in turn have an age range between 134 and 122 Ma Mizusaki et al., 1992 . Above these basalts, Moreira et al. 2007 distinguished and described three other lithoestratigraphic units that overlie the basal volcanic sequence and were formed prior to the deposition of the evaporites in the Santos Basin. The basal unit is known as Pic arras Formation, which is characterised, in its proximal part, by alluvial fan conglomerates and coarse to medium-grained sandstones, composed of monocrystalline quartz and feldspar grains, plutonic rock and basalt fragments, and by fine-grained sandstones, siltstones and shales in distal lacustrine portions. The second unit corresponds to the Itapema geochemical and petrographic information. The ultimate purpose of our study, though, is to apply the 87Sr 86Sr data as a proxy for the reconstruction of the evolution of lake hydrologic conditions during the deposition of the carbonates of the Itapema and Barra Velha Formations, roughly corresponding to the rift and post-rift sequences, respectively. These data are integrated into a series of numerical models, in order to test prior assumptions based on general geological, sedimentological and palaeontological knowledge of the area. The resulting models in a broader scale are useful to support many of the interpretations made here and elsewhere e.g., Thompson et al., 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2015 Tedeschi, 2017 Souza et al., 2018 . These results help to introduce new ideas on the general hydrologic conditions of the lake system during the deposition of the pre-salt carbonates, and on its evolution through time. 2. Geological setting The data used in the present study comes from a single well, henceforth named well S10, located offshore the Brazilian southeastern margin, approximately 200 km south off the coast of Rio the Janeiro, in the Santos Basin Fig. 1 . The figure is based on a palaeogeographic reconstruction for the early Aptian of Torsvik et al. 2009 and shows present-day coastlines for reference. For comparative purposes, the area of modern-day Lake Tanganyika, a rift lake in eastern Africa with approximately 650 km in the main axis and 50 km wide, is rotated and projected to actual scale in the map, and the outline of the Brazilian salt basins of Espi rito Santo, 62 Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 507 2018 60 80 R. Pietzsch et al. long-standing debate on the occurrence of the first marine incursions during the opening of the South Atlantic has also involved these deposits. Silva-Telles et al. 1994 have attributed marine incursions into Campos Basin already during Jiquia times, which corresponds to the deposition of the coquinas from the Lagoa Feia Group the counterpart of Itapema Fm. in the Santos Basin , but this has been contested by Thompson et al. 2015 . Dias 2005 attributed a marine deposition to the carbonates of the Macabu Formation Lagoa Feia Group, Winter et al., 2007 , Campos Basin, which is adjacent to Santos Basin, possess the same facies association and is considered to be time equivalent to the Barra Velha Formation. Moreira et al. 2007 and Gomes et al. 2009 suggested that the latter formation was deposited in a transitional environment, under marine influence. In turn, Wright and Barnett 2015 also added to the controversy regarding the depositional history of these carbonates, discarding the hypothesis of marine origin and favouring the deposition of the Barra Velha carbonates in an alkaline lacustrine environment, based on sedimentological and mineralogical descriptions. Recently, Tedeschi 2017 has provided strong evidence in support of this latter view, based on 87Sr 86Sr data from carbonates of the Campos and Santos basins. Finally, Souza et al. 2018 have presented a new petrologic study in which the authors interpret many of the Barra Velha carbonate rocks as travertine-related deposits, derived from a significant contemporaneous hydrothermal component of this system. Our study is focused on the Itapema and Barra Velha Formations, correlated to the Jiquia and Alagoas local stages based on ostracods, respectively, covering the syn-rift to post-rift sag sequences. These in turn have been traditionally considered to range approximately from late Barremian to late Aptian Moreira et al., 2007 Poropat and Colin, 2012a Buckley et al., 2015 Thompson et al., 2015 but see also Tedeschi et al., 2017 . The studied rocks are predominantly composed of carbonates, with variable proportion of silicate minerals. Formation, which is generally composed of interbedded bivalve rudstones and grainstones, and black shales. The upper unit is known as the Barra Velha Formation, and has recently been described in greater detail by Arienti et al. 2018 and Souza et al. 2018 . This unit is predominantly constituted by shrubby limestones, laminated limestones and dolostones, intraclastic grainstones and hybrid conglomerates and arenites, as well as spherulitic and dolomitic Mg-rich silicate claystones. Above the Barra Velha Fm. lies the evaporitic sequence, constituted by nearly 2 km of salt deposits in some parts of the basin, and corresponding to the Ariri Formation Moreira et al., 2007 . Still above them lies a sequence of marine platform carbonates overlain by thick deposits of coastal, shelf, slope and pelagic sediments, ranging in age from Albian to the Holocene. The evolution of the Santos Basin occurred in such a way that it favoured a progressive burial of the pre-salt rocks, and for this reason, they do not crop out in any portion of the basin. Fig. 2 presents the stratigraphic chart of Santos Basin along with biostratigraphic zones, with focus on the specific interval corresponding to the Early Cretaceous. The Barra Velha Formation lays unconformably over the Itapema Fm. This limit is usually easily mapped in seismic sections, having a regional expression, and is known in both Campos and Santos basins as the pre-Alagoas unconformity Winter et al., 2007 Moreira et al., 2007 . The age corresponding to the top of Itapema Fm. is not well constrained, but is estimated to be around 120 and 123.1 Ma, according to definitions for the timing of the pre-Alagoas unconformity presented by the latter authors. The Barra Velha Fm. is further subdivided in two stratigraphic sequences the unconformity bounded lower and upper Barra Velha Formation. The intra-Alagoas unconformity, not always traceable, represents the boundary between these two. The upper Barra Velha Fm. is further limited by the Ariri Fm. deposits above it Moreira et al., 2007 . The lower and upper Barra Velha Fm. correspond to the upper synrift and to the sag phases, respectively Moreira et al., 2007 Buckley et al., 2015 . The facies corresponding to these two sequences have been interpreted in the past as being deposited in a transitional environment, from continental to shallow marine setting Moreira et al., 2007 . In the majority of the South Atlantic offshore basins the biostratigraphic charts with respect to the Lower Cretaceous interval are based on non-marine ostracods and or palynomorphs Schaller, 1969 Viana et al., 1971 Moura, 1988 Silva-Telles, 1992 Poropat and Colin, 2012a, 2012b Grosdidier et al., 1996 . Classically, the biostratigraphic zonation based on non-marine ostracods led to the establishment of six local stages, spanning from the Tithonian to the lower Albian Moura, 1988 , two of which are important to the present study the Jiquia and the Alagoas local stages, which span from the Barremian to the lower Albian Fig. 2 . In a broader sense, all of the aforementioned studies converge to the same results, with a few discrepancies appearing only in the detailed approach. Absolute age determinations for this non-marine sequence have been a long-standing problem difficult to tackle. Estimations of the duration of the Jiquia local Stage, which encompasses the whole of the Itapema Fm., have varied from 2 to 5 Myr Silva-Telles, 1996 . Estimations for the Alagoas local Stage, comprising the entirety of the Barra Velha and Ariri Formations, have been an even worse problem, because of inconsistencies with respect to the upper limit of its type section, its lower faunistic diversity of ostracods and scarcity of any other fossil group useful for the purposes of relative dating. In a recent contribution though, Tedeschi et al. 2017 presented new evidence in which the evaporites above this entire sequence may be correlated to the early Aptian Oceanic Anoxic Event 1a OAE 1a , around 120 or 125 Ma according to Malinverno et al., 2010 and Ogg et al., 2012, respectively . Thus, previous estimates of ages for the sequences below the evaporites are unquestionably pending thorough revision as well. In addition to the depositional history of the pre-salt succession, a 3. Methods 3.1. Sampling and material The data used in this study were all acquired from well S10 Fig. 1 . The studied interval encompasses 800 m of rock record, whose present-day depth is nearly 5000 m below sea level. The samples for the geochemical study comprise recovered sidewall cores roughly 3 cm in length per two and a half centimetres in diameter in average. Usually only a small fraction of a few grams is harnessed for chemical studies and biostratigraphic analyses, and thus allowed to be completely consumed. 3.2. Cleaning protocol for geochemical analyses Prior to the geochemical analyses, all samples were submitted to oil and salt extraction. This was conducted in two steps using Soxhlet apparatuses 1 using an azeotrope mixture consisting of methanol and chloroform 30 70 v v , until no fluorescence under 365 nm wavelength UV light was observed, which was followed by 2 extraction with methanol and using 10 AgNO3 for checking salt removal. The absence of AgCl precipitates indicated complete removal of the latter. After drying all available samples were crushed and ground to a size below 80-mesh powder using agate pestle and mortar, and were homogenised. Aliquots were then taken for the geochemical analyses. 3.3. Biostratigraphy The non-marine ostracod analyses were carried out on 123 composite cuttings, each individual sample comprising material collected within every 6 m, and on 60 additional cuttings collected in three-metre intervals along the intermediate portion of the well. Additionally, 36 sidewall core samples, unevenly distributed along the well, were also 63 Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 507 2018 60 80 R. Pietzsch et al. used for this purpose. The samples were processed according to the standard methodology, starting by soaking 60 g of sediments in the case of cuttings in a 30 hydrogen peroxide solution until the complete oxidation of organic matter. Next steps included sample washing on a 0.125 mm sieve and handpicking of total specimens. The identification of the picked specimens was done using a stereomicroscope with reflected light. filled with SrSpec 100 150 m resin, after the first leaching. 87Sr 86Sr ratios were determined using a Triton Plus thermal ionization mass spectrometer in static multicollector mode at the Geochronology Laboratory of the University of Brasi lia. Analyses were calibrated with measurements of the NBS-987 standard SrCO3 , yielding an average value of 0.710280 0.000010 2SD . All 87Sr 86Sr data were corrected for fractionation assuming a 88Sr 86Sr ratio 0.1194. 3.4. Petrography 3.7. Statistical analysis Altogether, 151 sidewall core samples were analysed, described and classified under a transmitted polarised light optical microscope, considering texture, fabric and compositional aspects. Hence, modal compositions of primary and diagenetic minerals and paragenetic interpretations were obtained through systematic qualitative petrography in each thin section prepared from samples impregnated with blue epoxy resin. Staining with hydrochloric solution of alizarin Red-S and potassium ferrocyanide was performed in order to differentiate the carbonate mineral phases cf. Friedman, 1959 . Scanning electron microscopy analyses were carried out on carbon-coated selected thin sections in a JEOL JSM-6690LV microscope with support from an Oxford-Inca energy dispersive spectrometer EDS for a finer characterisation of the elemental composition of some constituents. For statistical treatment all elements were converted to the same unit, ppm. Those originally reported as oxides were also converted to element concentration. A composite table was built to include the additional set of samples that had results originated only from XRF analysis and to report all data together for the following steps necessary to statistical assessment see Supplementary material Supplementary material is available upon request . Prior to statistical analysis, elements were evaluated to account for the number of undetected values. The composite data of potassium ICP-OES handheld XRF data represented the largest set of samples with lower than limit of detection results amounting 16.8 samples below LOD for both ICP-OES and XRF, where K2O 0.01 and 0.02 , respectively . These zero results were replaced by a random value between zero and the respective limit of detection and the same followed for the other elements that were in similar situation. Once the data were properly organised they were ready for statistical analysis. In order to better assess the elemental data, in addition to the traditional evaluation of bivariate plots between isotope and element ratios, as in some cases used further below, Principal Component Analysis PCA was employed to evaluate the relationship among all the elements. The need for caution when drawing inferences from simple correlations between single elements or their ratios to some common denominator is a subject already well documented in geochemistry and chemometrics more generally e.g., Aitchison, 1986 Rock, 1988 Rollinson, 1993 Varmuza and Filzmoser, 2009 Filzmoser et al., 2009 . Compositional data carry the intrinsic characteristic that no individual component can be interpreted isolated from each other, derived from the fact that 3.5. Elemental composition A total of 194 sidewall core samples were analysed for determination of nine selected elements Sr, Ca, Mg, Mn, Fe, K, Rb, Al and Si. From that total, 192 intact sidewall core samples were analysed on their flat surfaces using an Olympus Delta Premium 6000 handheld emission dispersive X-ray fluorescence device XRF after the cleaning protocol. This instrument is equipped with a Rh anode working at 4 W as an excitation source and a 40 kV tube. Samples were analysed in a workstation for operator protection under atmospheric environment, in both Soil and Mining Plus modes. In addition, 151 sidewall core samples had enough material to follow grinding and powdering, after which they were analysed by ICPMS and ICP-OES. Determination of major elements Ca, Si, Al, K and Rb was carried out on powdered samples fused in lithium metaborate and analysed after digestion in HCl for determination of whole rock composition. The first four elements were analysed in an Optima 7300 DV Perkin Elmer inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer ICP-OES , whereas Rb was determined in an Elan DRC II Perkin Elmer ICP-MS. The elements Mg, Fe, Mn, and Sr were also determined in the ICP-MS, after digestion of the powders in aqua regia solution 3 1 HCl HNO3 v v for extraction of elements bound essentially to the carbonate phase. Reproducibility and precision of the methods were based on the analysis of Certified Reference Materials and laboratory duplicate samples. Reference materials IPT-122 dolomitic limestone , IPT-44 limestone , NIST-1d argillaceous limestone , NIST-88b dolomitic limestone , and BRP-1 basalt were used to calibrate XRF analyses and verify both reproducibility and precision of the methods above. A total of 149 samples overlap between XRF and ICP methods, so that quality control could be performed in order to verify discrepancies that could arise from the use of results derived from different methods. The analytical data can be consulted in the Supplementary material which is available upon request. x1 x2 ... xD 1 1 where the terms in Eq. 1 correspond to individual element concentrations. The set of compositional data as a whole comprises a vector, or a matrix, that is subjected to the effects of unit-sum constraint, or closure, where one single sample is represented in the following way Aitchison, 1986 x D x1 , x2,..., xD 2 This constraint can eventually lead to forced correlations between variables. In order to avoid this problem, before multivariate statistical analysis the compositional data were first treated following the mathematical procedure of centered log-ratio transformation Aitchison, 1986 Filzmoser et al., 2009 Montero-Serrano et al., 2010 , which is defined as x1 xD clr x y1,..., yD ln ,..., ln D D D x i D x i 1 i 1 i 3.6. Strontium-isotope analyses 3 As will be seen later, this transformation allows good evaluation of the results of Principal Component Analysis at the level of exploratory data analysis, significantly reducing bias that might otherwise occur. These results allow to address important aspects with respect to the behaviour of the elements and to support additional inferences concerning palaeoenvironmental or diagenetic conditions associated with the samples. 194 rock samples were analysed for 87Sr 86Sr ratio. For this purpose, 1 mg of carbonate powder was digested in weak acetic acid to dissolve only the carbonate fraction and avoid leaching of 87Sr and Rb from non carbonate phases that might be present, which was followed by separation of Sr from the eluent in Teflon chromatographic columns 64 Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 507 2018 60 80 R. Pietzsch et al. well comprise the biozones OS-1010 to RT-011 described in the Campos Basin by Silva-Telles 1992, 1996 and Poropat and Colin 2012a , suggesting a relatively continuous record. Considering only the Jiquia interval, the five bioevents shown in Fig. 3 exhibit a decrease in the number of genera, from three to one, that seem to be more sensible to the degree of salinity and or alkalinity towards the top of the well. In the lower portion of the well the recovered Jiquia genera Reconcavona and Petrobrasia extinguish and the same happens in the record of the upper Jiquia to Hourcqia and Ilyocypris genera. The Jiquia -Alagoas transition occurs along a sparsely fossiliferous interval with badly preserved shells. The ostracods retrieved from the Alagoas local Stage belong to the same genus Pattersoncypris , but the abundance and richness are remarkable at the base and at the middle of the studied section, both decreasing to the top. The upper part of the Alagoas becomes barren in ostracods until the base of the evaporites. Recovered species show that in the studied well, from lower Jiquia to the upper Alagoas, the ostracod fauna experienced a decrease in ornamented and robust shells as the extinction of these genera gives place to thinly skinned carapaces. This observation, in turn, indicates that the environmental conditions of the lake in which they lived became progressively more stressing with time Bate, 1999 . Regardless of the uncertainties concerning the exact timing of the deposition of the pre-salt rocks, as introduced above, the nearly complete ostracod record suggests significant continuity in the deposition of the sequence. The pre-Alagoas unconformity represents the main hiatus, and the span of time comprised in this gap is not clear, because of the absence of marine fossils, and consequently, the impossibility of direct calibration of the lacustrine sequence as a whole against the formal international chronostratigraphy, based on marine sections. Nonetheless, it has been traditionally accepted to be an erosion nondeposition episode around 120 and 123.1 Ma, according to interpretations published by Winter et al. 2007 and Moreira et al. 2007 and 3.8. Box-model In order to try to reconstruct the main fluxes that may have contributed to the original lake, we used a simple box model derived from the equation of Richter et al. 1992 , which is slightly adapted to our case N dRlw Fm Rm Rlw Ff Rf Rlw Fs Rs Rlw dt 4 where N stands for the total number of moles of Sr in the lake water, Rlw is the 87Sr 86Sr of the lake water, Fm is the flux of Sr into the lake derived from a mafic source end-member, which has an average 87 Sr 86Sr of Rm, and Ff is the flux of Sr derived from a felsic source endmember, with average 87Sr 86Sr of Rf. Fs is the flux to the sink, represented by precipitation of carbonate sediment, and Rs corresponds to the 87Sr 86Sr ratio of the sink, which is assumed to be equivalent to that of the lake water. Hence, the last term of the equation cancels out. The remaining parameters and the numerical values used in the model will be addressed in detail in the discussions further below. Finally, the same modelling conditions were applied to two different age scenarios for the deposition of the Barra Velha Fm., because of the uncertainty regarding its timing and of the relevance to test how different depositional rates would affect our initial premises. These scenarios are henceforth called scenario 1 and scenario 2. 4. Results and discussion 4.1. Biostratigraphy and age estimation The collected ostracods span a biostratigraphic record comprised of five bioevents for the Jiquia local Stage, relative to species extinctions, and three bioevents for the Alagoas local Stage Fig. 3 , similarly characterised by extinctions of species. The associations found in the Age Ma 113 120 Ma Aptian Alagoas Local Stage Bioevents Genera Stratigraphic Distribution Pattersoncypris BE-8 BE-7 BE-6 123 Ma Retrieved ostracods BE-5 Ilyocypris Hourcqia BE-4 Aptian Jiquia Local Stage BE-3 BE-2 126 Ma BE-1 Fig. 3. Retrieved ostracods in samples from the well presented in this study, depicting a biostratigraphic record of five bioevents extinctions for the Jiquia local Stage and three bioevents extinctions attributed to the Alagoas local Stage, covering the full range of biozones expected for these intervals, according to Fig. 2 and to Silva-Telles 1992, 1996 , Rangel and Carminatti 2000 and Poropat and Colin 2012b . The pre-Alagoas unconformity is implied in this figure, and is assumed in the present study to last between ca. 1 2 Myr, based on inferences reported by Winter et al. 2007 and Moreira et al. 2007 . Two different ages are depicted as possible upper boundaries for the studied interval 113 Ma, based on traditionally published stratigraphic charts e.g., Moreira et al., 2007 and 120 Ma, based on more recent data cf. Tedeschi et al., 2017 , where the asterisk refers to the 120 Ma upper boundary. See the text for details. 65 Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 507 2018 60 80 R. Pietzsch et al. characteristic crystal-shrub and laminated palisade fabrics Wright and Barnett, 2015 Herlinger et al., 2017 Souza et al., 2018 , with the predominance of the former. There are also occurrences of spherulitic and fascicular-optic calcite aggregates partially replacing and displacing Mg-silicate laminations and particles, suggesting an eogenetic origin of these components. Mg-silicate constituents are commonly dissolved, silicified or dolomitized. Intraclastic grainstones are recurrent and mainly composed of fragments of either fascicular or spherulitic aggregates, recording successive events of hydrodynamic reworking inside the lake not shown . The upper portion is largely devoid of significant detrital material, with subordinated presence of silt-sized quartz, feldspar and mica grains and detrital clay. Bioclastic material is scarce and represented by rare ostracod shells. These sedimentological evidences suggest that fluvial input was likely greater or more significant during the time of deposition of the Itapema Formation, in the Jiquia . Fig. 4 illustrates some of the most common primary and diagenetic constituents found in the studied well. Mg-silicate constituents e.g., kerolite and stevensite are labile and more susceptible to be either dissolved or replaced by calcite, silica and dolomite, being frequently underestimated in the past. Just recently, few authors highlighted such features both in rift and sag intervals of the Campos and Santos basins Goldberg et al., 2014 Armelenti et al., 2016 Tosca and Wright, 2015 Souza et al., 2018 . Recently, Alvarenga et al. 2016 documented for the first time occurrences of hydrothermal vents associated to the rift-phase Lagoa Feia Group of Campos Basin. Winter et al. 2007 had previously interpreted that this group contains mineralogical associations, such as talc and stevensite that the authors interpreted as products of hydrothermal activity within alkaline volcanic lake s in Campos Basin. Hence, hydrothermal activity was likely also common in Santos Basin, as also suggested by Souza et al. 2018 . In spite of that, seepage unrelated to hydrothermalism could also have been another source of ions to the lake. Discharge of groundwater as cold seeps or springs can be a significant component of recharge in many lakes, as documented, for instance, in the Ethiopian plateau and in the Great Salt Lake Kebede et al., 2008 Hart et al., 2004 . the biozone calibration attempt made by Poropat and Colin 2012a , as previously shown. Moreover, as introduced above, the age of the bottom of the evaporites has been generally accepted to be around 112 or 113 Ma until very recently cf. Dias et al., 1994 Dias, 1998 Dias, 2005 Davison, 2007 Karner and Gambo a, 2007 . The latter age has been taken further to constrain the top of the Barra Velha Formation, according to Moreira et al. 2007 . Nonetheless, Tedeschi et al. 2017 suggest that these assumptions are probably wrong, and that the timing of the deposition of the evaporites very likely occurred during OAE 1a. This would place the top of the Barra Velha Formation at 120 or 125 Ma. Consequently, we considered the two different age scenarios in our models with reference to time below. The first one scenario 1 assumes the former age estimate and hence a considerably stretched interval of time for the deposition of the Barra Velha carbonates, and the other scenario 2 assumes the bottom of the evaporite sequence to be 120 Ma old, which results in a comparatively more compressed time period for the deposition of the Barra Velha Formation. To avoid inconsistencies we assume the age of 123 Ma to limit the top of the Itapema Fm., for both scenarios above. The age of the bottom of the entire sequence is constrained by the correlation of the Camboriu basalts with the Cabiu nas basalts of Campos Basin, whose age range between 134 and 122 Ma Mizusaki et al., 1992 Winter et al., 2007 Moreira et al., 2007 . We fix the bottom of the Itapema Fm. at 126 Ma in the two scenarios for the purposes of modelling. Thus, any changes that could be imparted to our calculations would be exclusively related to the extent of time of the deposition of the Barra Velha carbonates. Scenario 1 results in a minimum sedimentation rate of approximately 131 m Myr and 54 m Myr for the Jiquia and the Alagoas, respectively. Both are close to present-day sedimentation rates found in lakes belonging to rift settings, such as the Baikal and the Tanganyika Casanova, 1994 Talbot and Allen, 1996 . These sedimentation rates for carbonates are possibly somewhat underestimated, because they do not take into account the effect of compaction. Nevertheless, in a recent forward modelling study Faria et al. 2017 estimated a depositional rate of 80 m Myr for the Barra Velha carbonates which, although higher than the value used here, lies in close range with it. Scenario 2, on the other hand, results in a sedimentation rate of 131 m Myr and 210 m Myr for the Jiquia and the Alagoas, respectively. Although the sedimentation rate of the Barra Velha carbonates is nearly four-fold greater in this scenario, this rate of deposition is actually within the lower range of deposition of some modern lacustrine carbonates and travertines, for instance e.g., Lamb et al., 2007 Pentecost, 2005 Fouke, 2011 . 4.3. Geochemical data The handheld XRF has its limitations, and the analysis of unprepared raw samples increases the chances of occurrence of greater dispersity of X-ray energy. In addition, the nature of the heterogeneous rock sample itself prevents optimised analytical performance. Although not ideal, these were practical limitations that had to be overcome in order to provide additional insight into our conceptual model and test it more critically and quantitatively. Overall, the analytical results are fairly good, as shown in Fig. 5. Naturally, the correlations between ICPOES and handheld XRF data and ICP-MS and handheld XRF data in these cases are not exactly perfect, but the results show statistically significant levels of agreement p .01, df 147 and p .01, df 146, respectively . This supports the use of XRF data as complementary to the whole set of analysed samples, once it is done with caution and parsimony. In terms of geochemical composition, the graphics in Fig. 6 also distinguish clearly the two main intervals, Jiquia and Alagoas. The figure compiles scatterplot data of 87Sr 86Sr ratio vs. 1 Sr , Rb Sr, Sr Ca, Mn Sr and Mg Ca, providing another indication that different sources contributed in variable proportions with time to the overall isotopic composition and Sr concentration of lake waters. One mixing line is suggested from Fig. 6A and B, the 87Sr 86Sr vs. 1 Sr and 87 Sr 86Sr vs. Rb Sr, respectively, although it cannot be discarded that this effect is produced as a result of greater siliciclastic proportion at the base and its subsequent decrease upwards in the sequence. However, Sr concentrations in most samples were determined after selective digestion, and not from bulk rock analysis, as explained above, derived 4.2. Petrography The lower part of the studied section, the Itapema Formation, contains bivalve rudstones and grainstones coquinas , arenites composed of Mg-silicate ooids, peloids and intraclasts and bioclasts, as well as subordinated fine-grained laminated mudrocks and marls with variable organic matter content Fig. 4E H . In some samples, authigenic quartz occurs either cementing or replacing both primary and other diagenetic constituents, mainly Mg-silicates. Dolomite also occur either as cement or as replacement in some samples. Ostracods are common amidst these rocks. In some samples, phosphate bioclasts of up to a few millimetres, interpreted as being the remnants of vertebrate organisms, are also found. From the palaeontological point of view, the fossil record observed throughout the whole interval indicates that significantly arid conditions predate the Alagoas time, since no evidence of vegetation of any kind is found. Nevertheless, the Jiquia was probably relatively more humid than the Alagoas, as indicated by the ostracod fauna discussed above and by further geochemical data. The upper interval, represented by the Barra Velha Formation Fig. 4A D , belongs to the Alagoas local stage, and is predominantly composed of syngenetic fascicular-optic calcite aggregates, with 66 Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 507 2018 60 80 R. Pietzsch et al. A B 1 mm 1 mm D C 1 mm 1 mm E F 100 m 1 mm H G 1 mm 1 mm caption on next page drainage influenced than the Alagoas, with lower Sr concentration derived from somewhat more diluted waters. Another trend in Fig. 6A, represented by the samples within the ellipse area, likely correspond to recrystallized phases that may have lost some Sr content, but probably essentially from carbonates. Thus, it seems likely that the trend observed actually reflects a mixture of fluids from different sources, one more impoverished in Sr and another, which was not. In both cases, though, it seems reasonable to assume that the Jiquia was more 67 Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 507 2018 60 80 R. Pietzsch et al. Fig. 4. Photomicrographs of selected samples, representative of the main constituents of Itapema and Barra Velha Formations, observed in the studied well. A C images correspond to samples from the Alagoas Barra Velha Fm. sequence. Image D is from the Alagoas, but similar facies also occur in the Jiquia Itapem Fm. . E H images correspond to samples from the Jiquia . Images A and C correspond to facies 1 of Wright and Barnett 2015 , B to facies 2 and D to facies 3. A Shrub-like fascicular-optical calcite aggregates cemented by microquartz intercalated with dolomitized syngenetic matrix XP crossed polarizers . Calcite aggregates, actually non-magnesian, are fully recrystallized although preserving the original fibrous crystal fabric. B Calcite spherulites in silicified syngenetic Mg-silicate matrix XP . Mg-silicate laminations are partially preserved and occur as remnants. Dolomite occurs as rims covering calcite spherulites. C Shrub calcite aggregates P uncrossed polarizers . Growth-framework porosity blue-dye stained resin was enlarged by partial dissolution. D Laminated limestone intercalation between thin organic-rich mud and organic-poor carbonate P . See micrograph E for detail. E Phosphate bioclast in undifferentiated mud matrix replaced by microcrystalline calcite alizarin-dye stained , in laminated limestone P . Note streaks of organic matter and Mg-phyllosilicate remnants, and silt-sized detrital grains dispersed in diagenetic calcite matrix. Calcite is here interpreted as diagenetic since the characteristic fabric of micrite neomorphism was not identified and due to the presence of ghosts of original particulate deposit. F Arenite composed of carbonate and Mg-silicate pelloids, partially cemented by dolomite XP . G Arenite composed of neomorphised bivalve bioclasts and Mg-silicate ooids. Packing is tight due to plastic deformation of the ooids P . H Arenite composed of ostracod bioclasts and Mg-silicate pelloids P . For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. bottom of the well as indicated by the Al and Si profiles where they show the same trends and correlate , whereas the carbonates prevail along most of the studied interval. It is also possible to see that these carbonates have a significantly high content of Sr, and that there is indeed a difference in Sr concentration between the Jiquia and the Alagoas local stages, in which the latter becomes more enriched in this element. Authigenic Mg-silicates and silica, eventually, are another relatively important secondary component of the system indicated by the Si profile, uncorrelated with Al, and the Mg profile , often occurring together with the carbonates in the Barra Velha and Itapema Fm., as described above. Moreover, dolomite also accounts for a significant portion of Mg present in the samples throughout the well. These figures suggest that the Alagoas derives its relatively higher strontium concentration from evaporation and concentration of lake waters, as no other mixing line seems evident. The heavier 87Sr 86Sr end-member probably reflects a contribution of initially less Sr-enriched but highly evaporated waters, as we will discuss further below Fig. 6D . It could also be argued, on the other hand, that simply a different Sr Ca partition between solid and fluid could be the reason for such distinction. But other aspects related to the chemical composition of the carbonate samples and their mineralogy do not seem to favour this hypothesis. These are discussed in more detail below, with particular emphasis on the Mg Ca ratio. Also, the Sr Ca partition coefficient Kd may vary as a function of the Sr Ca ratio in the liquid, temperature did not have their isotopic composition significantly affected. From both Figs. 6 and 7 below it can be observed that the carbonates from the studied sequence as a whole have characteristically radiogenic signals, which are significantly higher than Aptian marine values, these in turn being lower than 0.7075 e.g., Bralower et al., 1997 Bodin et al., 2015 . Such high values indicate a significant continental influence, strongly supporting the deposition of the carbonates in a lacustrine environment. Moreover, a few additional distinctions can be made. Samples from Jiquia are predominantly limited to a range of lower 87Sr 86Sr values, below 0.7115 in general, whereas the opposite occur for samples from the Alagoas, which are roughly between 0.714 and 0.712. It is observed that the 87Sr 86Sr ratio generally increases with increasing carbonate content towards the top of the analysed section. The Rb Sr ratio as measured in the samples is usually well below 0.001 in roughly 60 of the cases 114 samples , becoming consistently lower upwards Fig. 6B . These observations also strongly indicate that contamination due to leachate contaminants in our samples should not be considered as a reason for the high 87Sr 86Sr ratio observed in the upper part of the section, since they become more radiogenic upwards with increasing carbonate prevalence, and therefore provide a good indication of actual lake water evolution. Fig. 7 also shows the concentration profiles of Ca, Sr, Al, Si and Mg along with that of 87Sr 86Sr. From these profiles, one can see that the contribution from detrital material is relatively low, but was somewhat higher at the 6000 50 B A 5000 Sr ppm ICP-MS Ca ICP-OES 40 30 20 10 4000 3000 2000 1000 Y 0.86 X 10 N 149 r 0.86 Y 0.74 X 530 N 148 r 0.82 0 0 0 10 20 30 Ca XRF 40 0 50 1000 2000 3000 4000 Sr ppm XRF 5000 6000 Fig. 5. Crossplots between ICP-OES vs. handheld XRF and ICP-MS vs. handheld XRF data, for elements A CaO and B Sr ppm , totalling 149 and 148 sidewall core samples, respectively. One outlier was removed from the Sr graph. Dashed lines linear regression r is the Pearson correlation coefficient p .01, df 147 and p .01, df 146, respectively , and the equations of linear regression are also displayed. 68 Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 507 2018 60 80 R. Pietzsch et al. 0.7140 0.7140 0.7130 A B 0.7130 0.7120 0.7120 0.7110 0.7110 0.7100 0.7100 0.7090 0.7090 0 0.7140 0.7130 0.050 0.100 0.150 0.200 0.250 0.300 0.7140 C D 0.7130 0.7120 0.7120 0.7110 0.7110 0.7100 0.7100 0.7090 0.7090 0 0.005 0.010 0.015 0.020 0.025 0.7140 0.7130 E F 0.7120 0.7110 0.7100 0.7090 caption on next page 69 Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 507 2018 60 80 R. Pietzsch et al. Fig. 6. Scatter plots of 87Sr 86Sr vs. 1 Sr 103 A , Rb Sr B , Mn Sr C , Sr Ca D , Mg Ca E , and Mg Ca vs. Mn Sr F . Red squares represent samples belonging to Jiquia local stage and gray circles are samples from Alagoas local stage. Lines suggest trends of mixing of fluids, although end-member compositions cannot be inferred clearly. Ellipses indicate samples that were likely more significantly modified after burial, although their Sr isotopic ratio apparently was not greatly altered. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. dehydrate as required for fixation on mineral surfaces Reeder, 1983 Deocampo, 2010 . As a result, dolomite may have formed in very early diagenetic stage, in periods of desiccation or fluid expulsion amidst the sediment, due to compaction and or crystal growth of later phases. Nonetheless, in terms of its Sr isotopic composition, it should be reasonable to expect that later phases such as dolomites would not differ significantly from primary carbonate phases, because they would derive from the same but more concentrated fluid. Notwithstanding, apart from the bivalves, whose shell composition vary and can be composed solely of aragonite Scholle and UlmerScholle, 2003 , the original constitution of the main carbonate content now comprised by calcite minerals is mostly speculative. Although the chemical analyses reveal Sr concentrations in the pre-salt carbonate samples compatible with those in modern calcite rather than aragonite minerals precipitated from the same waters e.g., Gasse and Fontes, 1989 Sunagawa et al., 2007 , the possibility of loss of Sr due to inversion of aragonite to a stable phase could not be entirely excluded. However, facies constituted by calcite shrubs Fig. 3 do not show evidence of previous microstructures and crystal dissolution and substitution, which would be required for replacement of aragonite by calcite Morse and Mackenzie, 1990 . In addition, the significant amount of bulk rock data and its consistency throughout the geological sequence allow us to have confidence with respect to its significance as a reliable proxy for general lake water chemistry and hydrology. Apparently, roughly 10 samples are suspected to have been subjected to more significant alteration according to the data displayed in Fig. 6, and these are also highlighted in the supplementary material table available upon request . Despite this, they have not been excluded from the whole set of data for modelling purposes. In general, along with petrographic observations, which allow distinguishing the presence of calcite from dolomite, it seems that the possibility of pervasive recrystallization significantly modifying the original rock isotopic composition can be disregarded. Hence, the 87Sr 86Sr ratio can be used as a proxy for palaeohydrologic reconstruction of the lake through time. and kinetics of precipitation, although it does not seem to vary appreciably in higher temperature ranges of deep diagenesis Jacobson and Usdowski, 1976 Gabitov and Watson, 2006 . Environmental temperature change is not expected to have been significant, for at that time span the lake system was already within the tropical range, and topography was not very high Karner and Gambo a, 2007 . Precipitation rates may indeed have varied with time of deposition. Fast rates are associated to higher Kd, and depending on the age model we use the Alagoas carbonates had either lower or greater rates of deposition than those from the Jiquia , as discussed above. Thus, it is not straightforward to assess the role of the rates of precipitation as a relevant controlling factor. On the other hand, when the Sr Ca ratio increases in the liquid phase, Sr concentration tends to increase proportionally in the solid Jacobson and Usdowski, 1976 . This supposition seems more likely in the geological context that is being considered and apparently agrees with observations. Additionally, the 87Sr 86Sr vs. Mn Sr data in Fig. 6C suggests two trends one, in the lower part of the diagram, which may represent the depositional history, in agreement with the Rb Sr and 1 Sr data, and another, in the upper part, that seems to be indicative of the interaction with post-depositional fluids modifying the primary carbonates. The latter trend suggests that the system may have become open and prone to dissolution and recrystallization of primary carbonate minerals, incorporating Mn ions, likely in reducing conditions, where the smaller ionic radius of Mn2 would not make it unfavourable to assimilation into the carbonate lattice. It is also seen from 87Sr 86Sr vs. Mg Ca in Fig. 6E, that Mg Ca ratio is usually rather low for the majority of samples, seemingly representing a low background value of 1. This allows discriminating a set of a few samples that were likely subjected to pervasive recrystallization within the ellipse area , without apparently, at least significantly, being able to alter the original 87Sr 86Sr isotopic composition. Alternatively, dolomite could have formed very early, at later stages during the deposition or during early diagenesis. Either way, such a few samples presenting signs of alteration, and the consistency of the 87Sr 86Sr values suggest that post-depositional fluids could not significantly overprint the primary isotopic signals, and that the system was likely rock-buffered with respect to any later fluids. Although the Mg Ca ratio represents bulk rock analysis, what is clear from the background values is that most of the carbonate phase present in the samples is consisted of calcite, and dolomite constitutes the subordinate carbonate mineral phase, as also observed from petrography. From Fig. 6F it is observed that dolomite samples do not contain expressive concentrations of Mn, and the opposite seems true for some of the samples composed by calcite. With respect to the three samples with significantly high Mg Ca ratio, another possibility is that they may constitute a mixture of carbonate and somewhat labile Mgclay minerals, because the latter may have been prone to dissolution by the digestion method that was used i.e., aqua regia dissolution . This may be clarified in future X-ray diffraction studies. It is not possible to securely infer, based on bulk chemistry alone, if the primary precursor carbonate phases were aragonite or calcite, or stable calcite or Mg-calcite. The considerable proportion of dolomite observed in some samples and the occurrence of Mg-silicates, as illustrated in thin-sections shown in Fig. 3, apparently suggest that the original fluid Mg Ca ratio was likely relatively high. In such circumstances, the precipitation of more pure Ca-carbonate, in the form of aragonite, is favoured, leading to even higher fluid Mg Ca ratios Deocampo, 2010 . In this case, dolomite would not represent a primary constituent in part because of the larger hydration sphere of Mg compared to Ca, resulting in kinetically unfavourable conditions to 4.4. Strontium isotope data To account for radiogenic contribution derived from detrital components we corrected our measured 87Sr 86Sr Rmeas to the initial 87 Sr 86Sr Rinitial using calculated 87Rb 86Sr values based on the ratio 86 Sr 88Sr 0.1194 and the abundances of the other naturally occurring Sr isotopes in our samples Faure and Mensing, 2005 . The Rb Sr results provided by the chemical analyses, discussed above, also necessarily had to be accounted for in this correction. The correction took into account the 87Rb decay constant of 1.42 10 11 y 1 and a perhaps overestimated age of 130 Ma. We chose to consider this age due to uncertainty regarding the absence of sufficient precise age constraints with respect to the pre-salt deposits and to deliberately extrapolate the maximum age of our section to an older limit. If no significant change results from this extrapolation, then it means modification of the original lake water 87Sr 86Sr and thus of the carbonates due to detrital contribution is of little concern and can be disregarded. The curve based on the corrected values is also shown in Fig. 7. It can be seen that the correction does not result in significant change for most of the profile, except for the bottom interval, where some of the corrected data become considerably less radiogenic. Although Richter and DePaolo 1988 and Richter and Liang 1993 have comprehensively addressed the problem of diagenesis affecting the original 87Sr 86Sr composition of marine carbonates, they concluded that this effect is small for conditions where high-precision 70 Fig. 7. Measured 87Sr 86Sr composition in the 194 carbonate-rich rock samples black and corrected ratio for initial 87Sr 86Sr composition red with respect to well thickness, along with the concentration profiles of Ca, Sr, Al, Si and Mg. The sample at the bottom of the well was arbitrarily placed at zero metre depth. The bioevents and the local stages based on non-marine ostracods are indicated to the left. The bioevents were established based on specimens recovered from cuttings samples. Letters A to H refer to samples from which photomicrographs shown in Fig. 4 were taken. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. R. Pietzsch et al. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 507 2018 60 80 71 Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 507 2018 60 80 R. Pietzsch et al. Fig. 8. Corrected ratios for initial 87Sr 86Sr composition of the 194 carbonate-rich rock samples relative to age estimations based on different literature sources. A Ages according to Moreira et al. 2007 , Winter et al. 2007 and biozone calibration to international chronostratigraphy after Poropat and Colin 2012b and references therein. C Age estimation after Tedeschi et al. 2017 . The smoothed curves of carbonate 87Sr 86Sr are based on the corrected ratio for initial 87Sr 86Sr ratio composition, and are shown as thick blue lines. B and D Rates of variation of the 87Sr 86Sr of lake water through time first derivative of the respective simplified smoothed 87Sr 86Sr curves . For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. favour of the preservation of the Sr isotope ratio, for example, comes from some of the samples of the Alagoas sequence. As described earlier and illustrated in Fig. 4, the calcite crystal-shrubs limestones are common to this sequence, and samples composed by finer fabrics and or containing more than a single carbonate mineral phase, such as dolomite, do not differ expressively from adjacent samples essentially represented by the former. From Fig. 8 it was possible to obtain the rates of change of the 87 Sr 86Sr with respect to time for scenarios 1 and 2, shown in Fig. 8B D, respectively. One can observe that age model scenario 2 results in rates of change roughly one order of magnitude greater than age model scenario 1. Apparently, we can also disregard a significant contribution from diagenesis of the carbonate rocks below i.e., the coquinas according to the geochemical data, discussed previously, and assuming that those rocks have been lithified very early. The existence of the pre-Alagoas unconformity between the two main rock units implies that a significant amount of time elapsed. Thus, while influx of interstitial waters from the carbonates of the sequence immediately below may have been stratigraphic correlation is not the main target of the study or it is not required at all. In the present case, the carbonates were deposited in continental environment. Although the salt immediately above may be entirely marine in origin, we do not address this question in our study since no samples of the salt layer were available and it is beyond the scope of this work. Neither were samples of formation water available to evaluate for buffering capacity between pore water and sediment, and verify if they are in equilibrium at any given point. In a drilling program, formation water is hardly a target worth of sampling due to time constraints. In addition, from the geological point of view, a lake, irrespective of its size, is a much more dynamic system than the oceans, with residence times of the elements significantly shorter than those found in the latter. For both the above reasons and those discussed in the previous item, we refrain from using our isotopic data to the very last digit of analytical precision and instead take into consideration up to the fourth significant figure of the 87Sr 86Sr ratio. Very high frequency variations were also disregarded, and thus we adopted a smoothed curve for the purposes of modelling in both age model scenarios 1 and 2 Fig. 8A C . Notwithstanding, another observation in 72 Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 507 2018 60 80 R. Pietzsch et al. -1 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 4 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 Mn A 0.8 3 Principal Component 2 26.2 clearly divide two very distinct fields, one comprising samples more influenced by terrigenous siliciclastic contribution, to the left, and another with samples more strictly related to chemical deposition, to the right. With respect to the Jiquia interval, it can be observed that its samples present greater silicate content likely associated with constituents of detrital nature, also shown by the chemical analysis and the PCA results. As shown above, the environment in general seems to have been relatively milder from the point of view of micropalaeontology, which reveals a greater abundance of non-marine ostracods in the lower part of the studied section, followed by a steady trend of decreasing occurrences and forms upwards. Together, these data support the assumption that fluvial input should have been more significant during that time. Regarding the upper interval pertaining to the Alagoas local Stage, the carbonates correspond essentially to authigenic precipitates, seldom containing mud-sized detrital siliciclastic material and rare bioclasts, represented by ostracod shells. This can be deduced also from the geochemical standpoint, as expressed in the PCA results. Whereas the general distribution of elements in both graphics A and B from Fig. 9 shows a similar pattern, there are subtle differences between them. Rubidium, aluminium, iron and potassium are in both cases related to the field that corresponds to stronger detrital contribution, on the left corner of the graphics. Silicon, on the other hand, is closely associated to those four elements in samples belonging to the Jiquia , whereas it shows an adverse behaviour when we consider the samples that belong to the Alagoas. Such a difference can be attributed to the greater occurrence of chert beds in the Alagoas Fig. 9A , with silica cementing pores or replacing previous mineral phases. Some minor terrigenous constituents are also present in the samples from this interval. This could be the reason why silicon did not correlate with principal component 1 PC1 to great extent, because it is not predominantly linked to detrital constituents. In addition, its soluble forms require distinct physical-chemical conditions from those of carbonates to precipitate. Probably for a similar reason, manganese do not correlate with any other element in the Alagoas, because it might be predominantly associated to phases other than carbonates, such as oxides. In the Jiquia Fig. 9B Mn shows greater correlation with Ca and Sr, suggesting that these carbonates might have formed incorporating some of this element in their structure, a feature that could be further investigated using high-resolution chemical analyses associated to cathodoluminescence in petrographic thin-sections. A similar pattern was already indicated in Fig. 6, which highlighted 87Sr 86Sr vs. Mn Sr ratio and showed signs of two distinct Mn contributions. The PCA results clearly show that this methodology can be applied preliminarily as a means of exploratory data assessment and to indicate ways to conduct further specific analysis in a given study. Accordingly, the geochemical data and the PCA results corroborate petrographic observations and the expected general behaviour of the elements. We can expect, additionally, carbonate samples from Jiquia to be relatively more calcitic, due to greater correlation of Ca and Sr alone with PC1, and carbonates from the Alagoas to contain a greater proportion of dolomite, as shown by the association among Ca, Sr and Mg in Fig. 9A. This final observation is also supported by the examination of thinsections. 1 Stronger detrital contribution 2 Stronger chemical contribution 0.6 0.4 1 Ca Sr Fe 0 0.2 0 Mg Al Rb -1 -0.2 -0.4 -2 Si -0.6 K -3 -0.8 -4 -1 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 Principal Component 1 42.7 -1 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1 4 B 0.8 Principal Component 2 13.1 3 Stronger detrital contribution Mg Stronger chemical contribution 0.6 Fe 2 Mn 1 0.4 0.2 Al Rb 0 0 Si -0.2 -1 Ca Sr K -2 -0.4 -0.6 -3 -0.8 -4 -1 -2 -1 0 1 2 Principal Component 1 66.5 Fig. 9. Results from the principal component analysis. A Loadings and scores for samples from the Alagoas. B The same for samples from the Jiquia . The fields to the left and right indicate components more directly related to detrital contribution i.e., the mechanical particles and to chemical contribution cations precipitated from solution , respectively. possible, that part of the system was likely kept buffered or did not contributed significantly as a source of ions due to its subsidence and compartmentalisation within the basin. 4.6. Box-model set-up Based on biostratigraphic evidence above, we know that the lowermost part of the studied interval presented greater faunal abundance and diversity, with characteristics of species living in a more suitable, less stressing environment, which suggests a more humid climate. Upward in the section and in the stratigraphy these characteristics change significantly, and the fauna becomes less abundant and diverse and the remaining species show thinner skinned shells, typical of a species living in more severe lake water conditions, possibly associated with a change in the local climate and or tectonic environment. 4.5. PCA results as supporting data for the model A principal component analysis was performed with the entire geochemical data set obtained previously. The results are presented in Fig. 9. The lower plot represents the results for Jiquia samples, and the upper plot corresponds to results of the PCA for samples from the Alagoas. The most interesting aspect of these plots is that they both 73 Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 507 2018 60 80 R. Pietzsch et al. sourced by volcanic terranes. But as we see from the above 87Sr 86Sr data determined in our carbonate samples, volcanic sources probably were not the only source to the lake. Felsic rocks from the basement and or alluvial material derived from it were likely also contributing as sources of ions to the composition of subsurface waters, as suggested by Tedeschi 2017 , or perhaps as another catchment area draining to the lake. However, concerning this latter argument the lack of detrital components in expressive amounts in the corresponding sequence does not support the hypothesis of direct input resulting from erosion and surface transport via catchments and rivers. On the other hand, the relative contribution made from waters draining or seeping through felsic rocks is speculative and can only be inferred. We do not know the exact configuration of the palaeodrainage basin, or of the groundwater system. However, we can assume some reasonable premises. For instance, Reston 2010 argues that the upper surface of a lake in a rift setting would initially be maintained above sea level as a result of initial thermal uplift and high volume of sediment influx. Consequently, excess water would drain from the rift-valley edges towards the open ocean. With further regional subsidence the basin would become internally draining and the lake surface would stand below sea level. Following this, the lake water would become more brackish and evaporation would become the only way to remove water from the basin. The thought is reasonable and is upon this scenario that we build our model. Geophysical investigation based on gravimetric, magnetic and seismic data supports the postulate that differentiated mantle-derived magma underplating added material to the highly stretched continental crust on the Brazilian southeastern margin below the structural high named the Outer High Carminatti et al., 2008 Gomes et al., 2009 Scotchman et al., 2010 Buckley et al., 2015 . Accordingly, this resulted in long lasting positive structures on which it is assumed that the deposition of shallow-water lacustrine carbonates was favoured, recording an almost continuous deposition from Barremian to the Aptian, such as the Tupi and Sugar Loaf highs Mohriak et al., 2012 Buckley et al., 2015 . Additionally, lakes in active rift settings are occasionally fed by subsurface waters of both hydrothermal origin or associated with groundwater seepages. Hydrothermal systems are known to occur in modern-day lakes in rift settings Tiercelin et al., 1989 Barrat et al., 2000 Dekov et al., 2014 , and there is compelling evidence in Campos Basin suggesting that the same might have occurred in Santos Basin Alvarenga et al., 2016 . Souza et al. 2018 have also given support for the hydrothermal origin of the Barra Velha carbonates in the Santos Basin. Besides this, the supply of subsurface waters, whether hydrothermal in origin or not, can be significant, as the existence of several lakes in arid zones is a testimony Hillaire-Marcel and Casanova, 1987 Gasse and Fontes, 1989 Casanova and Hillaire-Marcel, 1992a, 1992b Kebede et al., 2005 Kebede et al., 2008 . Moreover, Tedeschi 2017 has shown more direct evidence of significantly radiogenic groundwaters, extensively influencing the isotope values of the lake-derived carbonates spanning deposits from the basins of Campos to Santos. According to the evidence provided by his study and to additional observations, direct surface seawater incursion into the pre-salt lake can be discarded, at least significantly, because 1 strontium isotopes indicate the opposite trend than that one would expect for an opening seaway 2 in the studied well there are no occurrences of sulphate or chloride deposits interbedded with the carbonates along this interval, both as primary or diagenetic precipitates, not even as pseudomorphs or as engulfed remnants after complete or partial replacement by other diagenetic phases, or moldic porosity after complete dissolution of salt crystals 3 the absence of unequivocal marine fossils and 4 according to published data during most of this time the Floriano polis and Rio Grande Highs to the south of the basin appear to have prevented the access of marine waters, which finally seems to have occurred from the north during the late Aptian Arai, 2009 Scotchman et al., 2010 Thompson et al., 2015 Buckley et al., 2015 . The synthesis of the Along with the characteristic facies variation upwards and the geochemical data discussed previously, it can be deduced that whatever the reason for the significant change observed in the biostratigraphic record and in sedimentation pattern was, these changes reflect an alteration in the hydrology of the lake. These observations indicate that the lake system was likely fed by a river or drainage system, which contributed relatively more diluted waters to the lake and allowed a more diverse ostracod fauna to thrive. Its relative influence possibly became progressively less effective during the evolution to the sag phase, as a resulting lower relief would affect negatively the flow rate of surface waters and the source catchment area probably became further far away. This interpretation is compatible with the evolution of the tectonic environment, in which the lake would initially be embedded in a narrower rift valley and evolve to a lake enclosed within a progressively wider basin during the sag phase. To test this scenario in a numerical model a few other additional constraints must be addressed first. The numerical values chosen to run the mass-balance models based on Eq. 4 are bound to a limited array of data acquired directly from the sampled material and to a few assumptions that need to be made, and which are detailed below. First, there is a lack of direct evidence with respect to the precise lithological composition of the basement of Santos Basin. Information regarding the isotopic composition of these rocks is even scarcer. To the best of our knowledge, the best available data come from published studies referring to outcrops along the coast of Rio de Janeiro State and from inferences based upon aeromagnetic data. For instance, studies indicate that orthogneisses of tonalitic to syenogranitic composition associated to high-grade metamorphic rocks constitute the Precambrian basement of Santos Basin, belonging to the Cabo Frio tectonic domain Schmitt et al., 2008 Zala n and Oliveira, 2005 . The origin of this domain is not well known, and it has been proposed that it would be related to the Sa o Francisco Craton margin, a relict of the Congo Craton in West Africa or to a separate microcontinent Valladares et al., 2008 Schmitt et al., 2008 . The most incisive evidence regarding the nature and the Sr isotopic composition of the basement rocks comes from the study of Tupinamba et al. 2012 , who studied in greater detail the rocks of the Rio Negro Complex of the Ribeira Fold Belt. The latter consists of a plutonic portion of a magmatic arc emplaced by the subduction of the ESE border of the Sa o Francisco palaeoplate during the amalgamation of the Western Gondwana. These authors have shown a variable range of 87Sr 86Sr ratio values, covering the spectrum from more mafic components to more felsic ones Tupinamba et al., 2012 . Tedeschi 2017 recalculated the 87Sr 86Sr ratios provided by the latter authors to ages of 113 and 130 Ma, showing this suite of Neoproterozoic rocks should have had 87Sr 86Sr ratios in the range between approximately 0.704 0.735, with a median value of 0.711 at 113 Ma and a slightly higher median of ca. 0.713 at 130 Ma. There is also evidence for the flood basalts that overlie Precambrian basement in the Campos Basin and the nearby flood basalts from the Parana Basin. Both have been sampled and comprise tholeiitic basalts, with corrected 87Sr 86Sr from the former ranging between 0.70586 and 0.70926 and a single sample with 0.71892 Mizusaki et al., 1992 , whereas the latter shows a larger range in isotopic composition, from 0.70483 to 0.71151 Peate and Hawkesworth, 1996 Peate et al., 1999 . The basalts of the Camboriu Formation in the Santos Basin are stratigraphically correlated to those of the Campos Basin Moreira et al., 2007 , in such a way that similar isotopic compositions may be expected. More recently, there has been the suggestion, based on seismic interpretation, that the basalts of the Parana Basin, as well as a significant sedimentary succession of the latter, may constitute part of the basement of the Santos Basin Zala n, 2017 . Another evidence concerning the palaeo-lake basement rocks comes from recent studies published by Wright 2012 and Wright and Barnett 2015 that discuss the occurrence of Mg-silicate minerals in association with the carbonates. The authors point out that the occurrence of these tri-octahedral silicates together with calcite is an indication of lakes 74 Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 507 2018 60 80 R. Pietzsch et al. B Fig. 10. Simplified conceptual model illustrating the general geology and hydrology of the pre-salt rift system. Small blue arrows show infiltration to and recharge of the aquifers long black arrows indicate infiltration of groundwater to the lake basin. Thick red arrows underneath represent geothermal heat, which is assumed to decrease from rift to post-rift phase. Hachured areas propose the presence of aquifers relative to the lake basin, flowing mainly through fractured crystalline basement. Initial conditions for calculation in the numerical models are N lake water Sr 39 mol L Rf average felsic basement 87Sr 86Sr ratio 0.714 Rm average mafic basement latter volcanic rocks 87Sr 86Sr ratio 0.706 Ff 7.39 106 mol Sr year Fm 29.45 106 mol Sr year. A Idealization of the rift phase environment, corresponding to the time of deposition of the Jiquia sequence, where a deeper lake formed, which could eventually be subjected to water-column stratification. B Idealization of the post-rift phase environment, at the time of deposition of the Alagoas Barra Velha sequence, where a shallower, endorheic lake with a large areal coverage evolved. Illustrations are not to scale. The initial fluxes Ff and Fm given above are used in the calculations whose results are displayed in Fig. 11, lower axes. These parameters are reversed i.e., Ff 29.45 106 mol Sr year and Fm 7.39 106 mol Sr year for calculations whose results are shown in Fig. 11, upper axes. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. Post-rift Stage reaches half its initial value and another in which it decreases one order of magnitude from the initial value assumed. We do the same with respect to Fm to calculate the model dependent on this term. Differently from other published approaches e.g., Doebbert et al., 2014 , the effects of variable evaporation and precipitation fluxes directly impacting the lake volume are subjectively implied in this scenario. Hence, our choice was to consider a present-day lake from similar latitudinal range and possibly also similar area and initial lake volume, in an equivalent initial rift scenario. The Lake Tanganyika seems suitable for this purpose, as already illustrated in Fig. 1 above. For modelling purposes, strontium concentration in lake waters was taken from reference lakes in Africa, the Tanganyika itself and the Awash Basin in Ethiopia Barrat et al., 2000 Bretzler et al., 2011 , assuming an average N 39 mol L. It could be argued that this choice could possibly not be representative, since bedrock and surrounding lithologies might differ between present-day African locations and that of the Brazilian pre-salt lake, which would naturally result in distinct contributions of Sr. geological observations described above is represented in the conceptual geological model illustrated in Fig. 10. It is rather difficult to estimate the fluxes from catchment areas and or hydrothermal vents that may have contributed to the lake basin. One likely driver of hydrothermal influx, crustal heat flow, probably changed over time in the area during the time span considered as thermal subsidence progressed Karner and Gambo a, 2007 Reston, 2010 . As a result, hydrothermal flux probably varied as a function of this change. Additionally, influx of groundwater other than hydrothermal water is essentially function of hydraulic head, rather than heat flow. Therefore, if either hydraulic head or heat flow or both decreased with time, which is possible, because rift shoulders are eroded and crustal cooling occurs, it is reasonable to assume that the input parameters Ff and Fm in Eq. 4 should respond in accordance to that assumptions, i.e., both should decrease with time. We then consider three scenarios in this respect, one that takes Ff as constant through time, a second in which this parameter constantly decreases with time until it 75 Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 507 2018 60 80 R. Pietzsch et al. Fig. 11. Lower axes A Fluxes of Sr due to mafic sources when the contribution from felsic sources is held constant through the time span covered black circles and black dotted line, respectively , and when the latter decreases half its initial value and one order of magnitude from initial value at constant rate green squares with dotted and dashed line and red diamonds with red dashed line, respectively , according to the model parameters explained in the text B Fluxes of Sr due to felsic sources when the influx derived from mafic sources is held constant through the time span covered black circles and black dotted line, respectively and when the latter decreases half its initial value and one order of magnitude from initial value at constant rate green squares with dotted and dashed line and red diamonds with red dashed line, respectively , according to the model parameters explained in the text C The same as in A, but considering the age estimation for scenario 2 D The same as in B, but considering the age estimation for scenario 2. Upper axes A, B, C and D are the same as above, except for the initial values of Ff and Fm, which were swapped. Thus, here Ff 29.45 106 mol Sr year and Fm 7.39 106 mol Sr year are the initial values set to run the models. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. not very high from the start, as indicated from the absence of fossil fauna other than bivalves and ostracods, as discussed above, we introduced into our model an initial flux compatible with that of a river draining through an arid landscape, such as the Blue Nile. One must bear in mind that this is for practical purposes being considered conceptually equivalent to the flux derived from mafic source rocks, which might as well have comprised a source for subsurface waters flowing to the lake. Conversely, the same idea should apply to the felsic sources, which might have been exposed to weathering under surface conditions. These ideas are further detailed below, whose implications are discussed more deeply with aid of the numerical models. Regardless of these uncertainties, we need a starting point and we assumed for the influx derived from mafic sources Fm, a flux equal to 29.45 106 mol year Palmer and Edmond, 1989 . Similarly to what was described above for the influx derived from felsic sources, we also use three scenarios in the simulation with fixed Fm as input parameter one in which it is constant through time, a second in which it decreases constantly with time until reaching half its initial value, and another in Notwithstanding, changing the value of N in Eq. 4 would only produce a significant change in the results for very large values of dR dt Richter et al., 1992 . Regardless of that, it can be easily verified that changing N a few orders of magnitude to higher or lower values does not change the final result significantly. To account for the influx derived from felsic sources and Sr concentration in these fluids, we assumed as the initial value the same as that of hydrothermal flow reported by Tiercelin et al. 1989 and hydrothermal fluid concentration of Sr determined by Barrat et al. 2000 for the Tanganyika 3 L s and 78.1 mmol kg, respectively . This gives for the initial flux derived from felsic sources Ff approximately 7.4 106 mol year. In order to estimate the overall influx derived from mafic sources, Fm, from input flux from felsic sources Ff, three conditions are considered one in which Ff is kept constant throughout the entire studied interval, a second in which it decreases constantly with time until it reaches half its initial value, and a third in which it decreases one order of magnitude from beginning to end, as indicated before. Since we are considering an environment where riverine influx was 76 Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 507 2018 60 80 R. Pietzsch et al. range below 10 106 mol year. Conversely, in the case in which Fm has the starting condition of 29.45 106 mol year and decreases regularly to the top but no less than one order of magnitude , Ff actually increases considerably in some intervals in order to maintain the values of 87Sr 86Sr observed in the carbonate samples Fig. 11B D . Regardless of this difference in particular, both sets of modelled conditions show that Ff should have become the prevailing flux very early in the history of evolution of the basin, as determined from these initial conditions. This difference between the two main results A C and B D also highlights that at least two distinct conditions might explain the observed 87Sr 86Sr values in the carbonates the decrease of both Ff and Fm with time suggests that, depending on the lithology exposed or underlying the lake basin, either runoff or groundwater influx, or both, decreased results A and C, in which Fm shows an overall decrease for all the three conditions considered for Ff . On the other hand, results B and D show in general an increase in the values of Ff with time, at the expenses of progressively lower Fm values. The suggestion in the models derived from the initial conditions in Fig. 11B D is that the flux Ff was predominantly derived from groundwaters in contact with felsic rocks, since there is no sedimentologic evidence for detrital transport. From approximately the middle part of the Barra Velha Fm. onwards Ff falls abruptly, but recovers towards the top, although there are recurrent falls along the way. Several episodes of greater fluxes appear to have occurred, reaching its greater value of 1274 106 mol year in the model considering constant fluxes derived from mafic sources black circles in Fig. 11B D , after which Ff decreases abruptly towards the top of the studied sequence. The flux of Sr from felsic sources apparently decreased to a background value, no greater than ca. 15 and 190 106 mol year in the uppermost Barra Velha Fm., considering the corresponding flux of Fm that yields the bigger Ff values i.e., constant Fm through time . Considering the other extreme used in these models, i.e., Fm decreasing one order of magnitude, Ff falls more pronouncedly after the intermediate portion of the Barra Velha Fm., despite showing the same high frequency pattern between alternating episodes of fall and followed by increase in its fluxes red diamonds in Fig. 11B D . Notwithstanding, the compilation of all results shows that Ff should have been indeed higher than Fm for most of the time, and might even have increased relative to the latter during the evolution of the lake system. From the point of view of the data discussed so far and the geological evolution of the basin, this scenario implies that whatever the origin of the fluids was, meteoric or groundwater, they likely reacted progressively more with felsic rocks with evolution of time. Since other geological observations suggest low riverine input, as derived from sedimentological and micropalaeontological data, for instance, this might be an indication that water recharge to the lake occurred mainly from groundwater interacting with basement rocks or their detrital derivatives. Hence, the synthesis provided by the quantitative models, that better adjusts to the geochemical, sedimentological and micropalaeontological observations, points to progressively lower riverine and somewhat subtle declining subsurface fluxes with time, in a broader sense. Eventually, in shorter-term cycles, fluxes may have increased momentarily, although the main trend seems to have been of general decrease. One point worth mentioning is that testing the models for the two scenarios with respect to time and all the rest being equal A versus C and B versus D shows that the influx trends are conserved, generally resulting only in negligible changes in the corresponding magnitudes. Although the trends in both scenarios are equivalent, the rate of change in scenario 2 is nearly one order of magnitude greater in general. Hence this is a necessary consequence that the influxes of Sr would have to change significantly faster in the latter case in order to maintain the isotopic mass-balance in the lake. In yet another calculation Fig. 11, upper axes we reversed the initial fluxes, attributing the value of 7.4 106 mol year for Fm and the value of 29.45 106 mol year for Ff, respectively. In the results according to models displayed in Fig. 11 upper axes it is shown that only which it decreases one order of magnitude from beginning to end. The lake water 87Sr 86Sr ratio Rlw is taken as equal to the corrected initial 87Sr 86Sr ratio determined from the analyses of the carbonates samples. Because the 87Sr 86Sr ratio is not subjected to isotopic fractionation, the depositional signal is not expected to have changed significantly. Unless a later fluid with distinct isotopic ratio interacted with the host rocks, represented by the deposited material, favouring dissolution and recrystallization of later phases with a different isotopic composition. However, as extensively discussed above, the geochemical data and petrographic observations, along with the recovery of wellpreserved fossils, are conspicuous evidences that support the view that no significant alteration occurred under burial regime and therefore these rocks generally preserve their depositional Sr isotopic composition. In order to reproduce the corrected strontium isotope curve and to avoid meaningless output i.e., negative fluxes we are not allowed many degrees of freedom with respect to the choice of the input parameters if we strictly consider two end members alone. Following this reasoning, the choice of Rm and Rf cannot be entirely arbitrary even if there are not enough data to constrain an average value for the overall lithologies that constituted the basin in which the lake was enclosed. Notwithstanding, the values we chose are not unrealistic and their choice is considerably conservative, with Rm 0.706 and Rf 0.714, close to the median values of the end-members established so far. The average value of Rm could have been lower as seen from available 87 Sr 86Sr data from basalts and other mafic rocks in adjacent areas Mizusaki et al., 1992 Peate and Hawkesworth, 1996 Peate et al., 1999 Tupinamba et al., 2012 . Moreover, the average value of Rf could have been considerably higher than the one adopted here, as observed from data published by Tupinamba et al. 2012 . However, the choice of values within a close range to those ones does not result in any significant modification of the output trends, the latter being our main concern, rather than inferring as precise as possible absolute flux values. The results from these distinct conditions are plotted in Fig. 11A B age model scenario 1 and Fig. 11C D age model scenario 2 , respectively. We can see that, for the established initial input of Sr equal to 7.4 106 mol year for Ff, there is a peak influx Fm at the bottom of the interval in the order of 11 106 mol year Fig. 11A C . The continuous, dotted and dashed, and dashed lines represent the input Ff values, and the curves with black circles, green squares, and red diamonds the fluxes derived from mafic sources that are needed to account in the given conditions for the 87Sr 86Sr that we have determined in the carbonate samples. It can be observed that, in general, Fm decreases with time in all circumstances, although a few lower pulses occur in the Jiquia and in the Alagoas. In the case in which the flux Ff is left to decrease constantly one order of magnitude with time red dashed line , Fm reaches a minimum modelled range in the order of 0.3 1 105 mol year close to the top of the studied succession, remaining nearly within this range until the salt above. Considering the three different modelled conditions, the overall modelled range of the flux Fm lies between 0.2 105 and 11 106 mol year with median 0.2 1 106 mol year during the span of time considered. In Fig. 11B D the input parameters are reversed. Fluxes derived from mafic sources are either held constant or allowed to decrease half its initial value and one order of magnitude with time from the initial value of 29.45 106 mol year continuous, dotted and dashed, and dashed lines, respectively . The corresponding fluxes derived from felsic sources are represented by the curves with black circles, green squares, and red diamonds, respectively. Overall, the latter fluxes vary within the range of ca. 16 1274 106 mol year median 52 203 106 mol year between models . In the models in which Ff is allowed to decrease at regular rates, from the starting condition of 7.4 106 mol year, the Fm also decreases fairly regularly, presenting some pulses along the way Fig. 11A C . Nevertheless, both fluxes conform in the sense that they continuously decrease with time, in the 77 Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 507 2018 60 80 R. Pietzsch et al. the magnitudes of the fluxes Fm and Ff would have changed, but there is no net change in the relative proportions between them i.e., Ff Fm is the same when comparing conditions between models from Fig. 11 bottom and upper axes , indicating that the same inferences as those made above are valid. With this, we show that the fluxes Ff were indeed very likely higher than Fm, irrespective of the initial and real values of them both, all the other parameters being constant. The considerably distinct isotopic composition between the Jiquia and Alagoas carbonates, from about 0.711 to 0.713 in their respective isotopic compositions, is another indication that a progressively more important source of waters to the lake should have been from groundwater recharge. A prolonged residence time within rocks possessing more radiogenic Sr values could drive the values of the lake water, and consequently of the carbonates, towards more radiogenic values too. Similarly to what occurs with groundwaters of lake basins in present-day eastern Africa e.g., Ojiambo et al., 2003 , long residence time amidst more acidic bedrock and or detrital alluvial material eroded from basement rocks, could provide waters from which the Alagoas deposits formed with more radiogenic 87Sr 86Sr isotope composition. The balance between this contribution and that from fluvial input, which we assume had a lower 87Sr 86Sr isotope composition, seems to be what drove the evolution of the 87Sr 86Sr isotope composition of lake water. In some regions of the pre-salt, seepage via groundwater discharge could result in travertine-like structures in fault-associated areas. Distant from fault zones, though, this recharge simply implies contribution to maintain the lake water at some given level. This is particularly the case if riverine input decreases or evaporation rate increases with time, reflecting intensification of a drier climate, which would result in greater concentration of Sr in solution. Notwithstanding, precipitation of carbonates very likely occurred as a result of concentration of the ions during increasing evaporation of lake water, because significant fluid delivery from surface runoff would result in diluted waters. This resulted in progressively more concentrated and alkaline lake water brines. This reasoning agrees with the geological observation and with the geochemical data presented earlier. Thus, the data apparently reflect a change in tectonic regime in a broader scale, with subordinated climatic control, greatly conditioned by the tectonic evolution of the basin. Therefore, climatic conditions certainly have had an important role in the deposition of the pre-salt carbonates as a whole, but it is rather clear that these conditions were subjected to the control of the tectonic evolution of the landscape. Riverine discharge, as well as subsurface influx, were also conditioned by factors such as erosion of mountains, decreasing hydraulic head and thermal flux, as discussed above. The general results of this model indicate that the pre-salt lake in Santos Basin probably evolved from a large and deep lake, possibly comparable in size to or even larger than Lake Tanganyika in eastern Africa, to a perhaps larger and shallower, considerably alkaline endorheic lake. The thermal subsidence during the sag period that followed the rift phase is conformable to the endorheic lake postulate that very likely was established thereafter Talbot and Allen, 1996 Reston, 2010 . over the continental sedimentation. This last phase though was not recovered and cannot be seen clearly from the sampled material, as the transition itself may be completely eroded, the unconformity at the base of the salt being the only remaining feature left from a period after that. Our mass-balance calculations show that a felsic component endmember should have been a significant source of water and ions, and of Sr, to the palaeo-lake. To achieve the radiogenic values observed in the carbonate rocks the felsic source had likely contributed with fluxes one to two, and up to four, orders of magnitude higher than the mafic source. Finally, the results obtained from the geological data integrated with the numerical models suggest that the overall higher order trend of decreasing fluxes from both sources with time is the more likely scenario, suggesting that the formation of the deposits became very likely constrained to progressively more evaporitic and alkaline lake waters. Regarding hydrothermalism, we do not mean by considering its occurrence that it is implied that all the deposits studied here represent travertine-like, fault associated carbonate build-ups. Rather, our point is that subsurface water recharge to the lake probably occurred via conduits scattered through the lake bottom and as seepage not necessarily linked to them. In some areas fault related build-ups may have formed, but far from faulted zones these fluids simply mixed with the main body of water, significantly contributing to the chemical and isotope composition of the carbonate rocks. Although the box model is considerably simple, it agrees well with the geological observations and provides useful insights into the evolution of the rift to post rift lake system, allowing to quantitatively reconstruct a plausible scenario for the deposition of the pre-salt carbonates. Thus, it seems an appropriate model that allows the deposition of both lake bottom and fault-associated carbonates more generally. Finally, we have worked through many uncertainties, but nonetheless we hope to have shown that our model represents a valid approach to help constrain and elucidate the scenario in which the presalt carbonates were deposited. Acknowledgments We are very grateful to the lab technicians Aline Marinheiro, Gabriela Moura and Erik Gueiros at Cenpes and UnB for their assistance in handling with the samples and with the analyses and our colleagues at Petrobras, whose names are many to be listed here, for years of discussion concerning the nature and genesis of the pre-salt carbonate deposits. Specifically, we thank the managers Oscar Strohschoen, Helga Voelcker, Farid Shecaira and Otaviano Pessoa, as well as Petrobras for allowing us to publish these data. We are particularly thankful to Marco Anto nio Schreiner Moraes for his helpful suggestions on the first draft of the manuscript. Jeanine Grillo and Ariany Sousa are thanked for discussions with respect to the ostracod assemblage in the pre-salt and their biostratigraphy. We also thank Laury Medeiros and Felipe Farias for enriching discussions. R.P. is very grateful to his team at Cenpes for relieving him from many tasks that would otherwise not ensure him enough time to integrate the geochemical data and to write this text. The final version of the manuscript was improved thanks to the constructive and helpful comments of three anonymous reviewers and the editor Thomas Algeo. 5. Conclusions References The present study reinforces the lacustrine origin of the pre-salt deposits from Santos Basin, and proposes a plausible model for the general conditions of their formation, suggesting that a somewhat freshwater lake was eventually replaced by a terminal highly alkaline evaporative lake. Initially apparently counterintuitive, the strontium isotope data show that the lake water evolved to more radiogenic values approaching the top of the pre-salt succession. This is evidence that the lake evolved for a long time completely disconnected from the oceans, basically controlled by the catchment areas and subsurface recharge system inputs that contributed in different proportions relative to one another over time, until the ocean finally had some influence Aitchison, J., 1986. The Statistical Analysis of Compositional Data. The Blackburn Press, New Jersey 416p . Alvarenga, R.S., Iacopini, D., Kuchle, J., Scherer, C.M.S., Goldberg, K., 2016. Seismic characteristics and distribution of hydrothermal vent complexes in the Cretaceous offshore rift section of the Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Mar. Pet. Geol. 74, 12 25. Amthor, J., Taberner, C., Manzo, E., 2018. Diagenesis of Pre-Salt Carbonates, Brazil Margin Challenging Paradigms of Reservoir in Evaporite Basins. AAPG Annual Convention Exhibition 2018, Salt Lake City, Utah. Arai, M., 2009. Paleogeografia do Atla ntico Sul no Aptiano um novo modelo a partir de dados micropaleontolo gicos recentes. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras 17, 331 351. 78 Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 507 2018 60 80 R. Pietzsch et al. sedimentological forward modeling of an Aptian carbonate reservoir deposited during the sag stage in the Santos basin, Brazil. Mar. Pet. Geol. 88, 676 695. Faure, G., Mensing, T.M., 2005. Isotopes, Principles and Applications, 3rd ed. John Wiley Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey. Fetter, M., Penteado, H., Madrucci, V., Spadini, A., 2018. The Paleogeography of the Lacustrine Rift System of the Pre-Salt in Santos Basin, Offshore Brazil. AAPG Annual Convention Exhibition 2018, Salt Lake City, Utah. Filzmoser, P., Hron, K., Reimann, C., 2009. Univariate statistical analysis of environmental compositional data problems and possibilities. Sci. Total Environ. 407, 6100 6108. Fouke, B., 2011. Hot-spring systems geobiology abiotic and biotic influences on travertine formation at Mammoth Hot Springs, Yellowstone National Park, USA. Sedimentology 58, 170 219. Friedman, G.M., 1959. Identification of carbonate minerals by staining methods. J. Sediment. Petrol. 29, 87 97. Gabitov, R.I., Watson, E.B., 2006. Partitioning of strontium between calcite and fluid. Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst. 7 Q11004 . Gasse, F., Fontes, J.-C., 1989. Palaeoenvironments and palaeohydrology of a tropical closed lake Lake Assal, Djibouti since 10,000 yr B.P. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 69, 67 102. Gierlowski-Kordesch, E.H., Jacobson, A.D., Blum, J.D., Valero Garce s, B.L., 2008. Watershed reconstruction of a Paleocene-Eocene lake basin using Sr isotopes in carbonate rocks. GSA Bull. 120, 85 95. Goldberg, K., Kuchle, J., De Ros, L.F., Scherer, C., Alvarenga, R., Ene, P., Armelenti, G., 2014. Resedimented deposits in the rift section of the Campos Basin. In AAPG Search and Discovery Article 90189. Gomes, P.O., Kilsdonk, B., Minken, J., Grow, T., Barragan, R., 2009. The Outer High of the Santos Basin, southern Sa o Paulo Plateau, Brazil pre-salt exploration outbreak, paleogeographic setting, and evolution of the syn-rift structures. In AAPG Search and Discovery Article 10193. Grosdidier, E., Braccini, E., Dupont, G., Moron, J.-M., 1996. Biozonation du Cre tace Infe rieur non marin des bassins du Gabon et du Congo. Ge ologie de l Afrique et de l Atlantique Sud Actes Colloques Angers 1994, 67 82. Hamon, Y., Sebastien, R., Deschamps, R., Gasparrini, M., 2012. Outcrop analogue of presalt microbial series from South Atlantic the Yacoraite Fm, Salta rift system NW Argentina . In AAPG Hedberg Conference Microbial Carbonate Reservoir Characterization , pp. 1 4. Harris, P.M., Ellis, J., Purkis, S.J., 2012. Analogs for carbonate deposition microbialites, tufas and travertines in early rift settings. In AAPG Hedberg Conference Microbial Carbonate Reservoir Characterization , pp. 1 4. Hart, W.S., Quade, J., Madsen, D.B., Kaufman, D.S., Oviatt, C.G., 2004. The 87Sr 86Sr ratios of lacustrine carbonates and lake-level history of the Bonneville paleolake system. GSA Bull. 116, 1107 1119. Herlinger Jr, R., Zambonato, E.E., De Ros, L.F., 2017. Infulence of diagenesis on the quality of Lower Cretaceous pre-salt lacustrine reservoirs from northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. J. Sediment. Res. 87, 1285 1313. Hillaire-Marcel, C., Casanova, J., 1987. Isotopic hydrology and paleohydrology of the Madagi Kenya -Natron Tanzania basin during the late Quaternary. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 58, 155 181. Jacobson, R.L., Usdowski, H.E., 1976. Partition of strontium between calcite, dolomite and liquids an experimental study under higher temperature diagenetic conditions, and a model for the prediction of mineral pairs for geothermometry. Contrib. Mineral. Petrol. 59, 171 185. Karner, G.D., Gambo a, L.A.P., 2007. Timing and origin of the South Atlantic pre-salt sag basins and their capping evaporates. In Schreiber, B.C., Lugli, S., Babel, M. Eds. , Evaporites Through Space and Time. 285. Geological Society of London Special Publications, pp. 15 35. Kebede, S., Travi, Y., Alemayehu, T., Ayenew, T., 2005. Groundwater recharge, circulation and geochemical evolution in the source region of the Blue Nile River, Ethiopia. Appl. Geochem. 20, 1658 1676. Kebede, S., Travi, Y., Asrat, A., Alemayehu, T., Ayenew, T., Tessema, Z., 2008. Groundwater origin and flow along selected transects in Ethiopian rift volcanic aquifers. Hydrogeol. J. 16, 55 73. Lamb, H.F., Leng, M.J., Telford, R.J., Ayenew, T., Umer, M., 2007. Oxygen and carbon isotope composition of authigenic carbonate from an Ethiopian lake a climate record of the last 2000 years. The Holocene 17, 517 526. Malinverno, A., Erba, E., Herbert, T.D., 2010. Orbital Tuning as an Inverse Problem Chronology of the Early Aptian Oceanic Anoxic Event 1a Selli Level in the Cismon APTICORE Paleoceanography 25, PA2203. Mizusaki, A.M.P., Petrini, R., Bellieni, G., Comin-Chiaramonti, P., Dias, J., De Min, A., Piccirillo, E.M., 1992. Basalt magmatism along the passive continental margin of SE Brazil Campos Basin . Contrib. Mineral. Petrol. 111, 143 160. Mohriak, W.U., Szatmari, P., Anjos, S., 2012. Salt geology and tectonics of selected Brazilian basins in their global context. In Alsop, G.I., Archer, S.G., Hartley, A.J., Grant, N.T., Hodgkinson, R. Eds. , Salt, Tectonics, Sediments and Prospectivity. 363. Geological Society of London Special Publications, pp. 131 158. Montero-Serrano, J.C., Palarea-Albaladejo, J., Marti n-Ferna ndez, J.A., Marti nez-Santana, M., Gutie rrez-Marti n, J.V., 2010. Sedimentary chemofacies characterization by means of multivariate analysis. Sediment. Geol. 228, 218 228. Moreira, J.L.P., Madeira, C.V., Gil, J.A., Machado, M.A.P., 2007. Bacia de Santos. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras 15, 531 549. Morse, J.W., Mackenzie, F.T., 1990. Geochemistry of sedimentary carbonates. Dev. Sedimentol. 48 707p . Moura, J.A., 1988. Ostracods from non-marine Early Cretaceous sediments of the Campos Basin, Brazil. In Hanai, T., Ikeya, N., Ishizaki, K. Eds. , Evolutionary Biology of Ostracoda Its Fundamentals and Applications. 11. Proceedings of the Ninth Arienti, L.M., Souza, R.S., Viana, S., Cuglieri, M.A., Silva, R.P., Tonietto, S., Paula, L., Gil, J.A., 2018. Facies Association, Depositional Systems, and Paleophysiographic Models of the Barra Velha Formation, Pre-Salt Sequence Santos Basin, Brazil. AAPG Annual Convention Exhibition 2018, Salt Lake City, Utah. Armelenti, G., Goldberg, K., Kuchle, J., De Ros, L.F., 2016. Deposition, diagenesis and reservoir potential of non-carbonate sedimentary rocks from the rift section of Campos Basin, Brazil. Pet. Geosci. 22, 223 239. Barrat, J.A., Boule gue, J., Tiercelin, J.J., Lesourd, M., 2000. Strontium isotopes and rareearth element geochemistry of hydrothermal carbonate deposits from Lake Tanganyika, East Africa. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 64, 287 298. Bate, R.H., 1999. Non-marine ostracod assemblages of the Pre-Salt rift basins of West Africa and their role in sequence stratigraphy. In Cameron, N.R., Bate, R.H., Clure, V.S. Eds. , The Oil and Gas Habitats of the South Atlantic. 153. Geological Society of London Special Publications, pp. 283 292. Bodin, S., Meissner, P., Janssen, N.M.M., Steuber, T., Mutterlose, J., 2015. Large igneous provinces and organic carbon burial controls on global temperature and continental weathering during the Early Cretaceous. Glob. Planet. Chang. 133, 238 253. Bralower, T.J., Fullagar, P.D., Paull, C.K., Dwyer, G.S., Leckie, R.M., 1997. MidCretaceous strontium-isotope stratigraphy of deep-sea sections. GSA Bull. 109, 1421 1442. Bretzler, A., Osenbru ck, K., Gloaguen, R., Ruprecht, J.S., Kebede, S., Stadler, S., 2011. Groundwater origin and flow dynamics in active rift systems a multi-isotope approach in the Main Ethiopian Rift. J. Hydrol. 402, 274 289. Buckley, J.P., Bosence, D., Elders, C., 2015. Tectonic setting and stratigraphic architecture of an Early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonate platform, Sugar Loaf High, Santos Basin, Brazil. In Bosence, D.W.J., Gibbons, K.A., Le Heron, D.P., Morgan, W.A., Pritchard, T., Vining, B.A. Eds. , Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. 418. Geological Society of London Special Publications, pp. 175 191. Burnett, A.P., Soreghan, M.J., Scholz, C.A., Brown, E.T., 2011. Tropical East African climate change and its relation to global climate a record from Lake Tanganyika, tropical East Africa, over the past 90 kyr. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 303, 155 167. Carlotto, M.A., Silva, R.C.B., Yamato, A.A., Trindade, W.L., Moreira, J.L.P., Fernandes, R.A.R., Ribeiro, O.J.S., Gouveia Jr., W.P., Carminati, J.P., Qicai, D., Junfeng, Z., Silva-Telles Jr., A.C., 2017. Libra a newborn giant in the Brazilian presalt province. In Merrill, R.K., Sternbach, C.A. Eds. , Giant Fields of the Decade 2000 2010 AAPG Memoir. 113. pp. 165 176. Carminatti, M., Wolff, B., Gamboa, L., 2008. New exploratory frontiers in Brazil. In 19th World Petroleum Congress, Madrid, Spain. WPC Proceedings. Carvalho, M.D., Prac a, U.M., Silva-Telles Jr., A.C., Jahnert, R.J., Dias, J.L., 2000. Bioclastic carbonate lacustrine facies models in the Campos Basin lower cretaceous , Brazil. In Gierlowski-Kordesch, E.H., Kelts, K.R. Eds. , Lake Basins Through Space and Time AAPG Studies in Geology. 46. pp. 245 256. Casanova, J., 1994. Stromatolites from the East African Rift a synopsis. In BertrandSarfati, J., Monty, C. Eds. , Phanerozoic Stromatolites II. Kluwer Academic, pp. 193 227. Casanova, J., Hillaire-Marcel, C., 1992a. Late Holocene hydrological history of Lake Tanganyika, East Africa, from isotopic data on fossil stromatolites. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 91, 35 48. Casanova, J., Hillaire-Marcel, C., 1992b. Chronology and paleohydrology of late Quaternary high lake levels in the Manyara Basin Tanzania from isotopic data 18O, 13 C, 14C, Th U on fossil stromatolites. Quat. Res. 38, 205 226. Davison, I., 2007. Geology and tectonics of the South Atlantic Brazilian salt basins. In Ries, A.C., Butler, R.W., Graham, R.H. Eds. , Deformation of the Continental Crust The Legacy of Mike Coward. 272. Geological Society of London Special Publications, pp. 345 359. Dekov, V.M., Egueh, N.M., Kamenov, G.D., Bayon, G., Lalonde, S.V., Schmidt, M., Liebetrau, V., Munnik, F., Fouquet, Y., Tanimizu, M., Awaleh, M.O., Guirreh, I., Le Gall, B., 2014. Hydrothermal carbonate chimneys from a continental rift Afar Rift mineralogy, geochemistry, and mode of formation. Chem. Geol. 387, 87 100. Deocampo, D.M., 2010. The geochemistry of continental carbonates. In Alonso-Zarza, A.M., Tanner, L.H. Eds. , Carbonates in Continental Settings, Geochemistry Diagenesis and Applications Developments in Sedimentology. 62. pp. 1 59. Dias, J.L., 1998. Analise sedimentologica e estratigrafica do Andar Aptiano em parte da margem leste do Brasil e no Plato das Malvinas consideracoes sobre as primeiras incursoes e ingressoes marinhas do oceano Atlantico Sul Meridional. In PhD Thesis, Programa de Po s-Graduac a o em Geocie ncias. Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre. Dias, J.L., 2005. Tecto nica, estratigrafia e sedimentac a o no Andar Aptiano da margem leste brasileira. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras 13, 7 25. Dias, J.L., Sad, A.R.E., Fontana, R.L., Feijo , F.J., 1994. Bacia de Pelotas. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras 8 1 , 235 245. Do Carmo, D.A., Whatley, R., Queiroz Neto, J.V., Coimbra, J.C., 2008. On the validity of two lower Cretaceous non-marine ostracode genera biostratigraphic and paleogeographic implications. J. Paleontol. 82, 790 799. Doebbert, A.C., Johnson, C.M., Carroll, A.R., Beard, B.L., Pietras, J.T., Rhodes Carson, M., Norsted, B., Ashley Throckmorton, L., 2014. Controls on Sr isotopic evolution in lacustrine systems Eocene Green River Formation, Wyoming. Chem. Geol. 380, 172 189. Dorobek, S., Piccoli, L., Coffey, B., Adams, A., 2012. Carbonate rock-forming processes in the pre-salt sag successions of Campos Basin, offshore Brazil evidence for seasonal, dominantly abiotic carbonate precipitation, substrate controls, and broader geologic implications. In AAPG Hedberg Conference Microbial Carbonate Reservoir Characterization , pp. 4 5. Faria, D.L.P., Reis, A.T., Souza Jr., O.G., 2017. Three-dimensional stratigraphic- 79 Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 507 2018 60 80 R. Pietzsch et al. 37 . Congresso Brasileiro de Geologia, Sa o Paulo, pp. 489 490. Silva-Telles, A.C., 1996. Estratigrafia de seque ncia de alta resoluc a o do Membro Coqueiros da Formac a o Lagoa Feia. In Master dissertation, Programa de Po sGraduac a o em Geocie ncias. Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre. Silva-Telles, A., Henz, G.I., Arai, M., 1994. Evidencias das primeiras ingresso es marinhas na fase rift da margem leste brasileira. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras v. 8 2 4 , 409 410. Souza, R.S., Arienti, L.M., Viana, S.M., Falca o, L.C., Cuglieri, M.A., Silva Filho, R.P., Leite, C.O., Oliveira, V.C., Oliveira, D.M., Anjos, C., Amora, R., Carmo, I.D., Coelho, C.E., 2018. Petrology of the Hydrothermal and Evaporitic Continental Cretaceous Aptian Pre-Salt Carbonates and Associated Rocks, South Atlantic Santos Basin, Offshore Brazil. AAPG Annual Convention Exhibition 2018, Salt Lake City, Utah. Sunagawa, I., Takahashi, Y., Imai, H., 2007. Strontium and aragonite-calcite precipitation. J. Mineral. Petrol. Sci. 102, 174 181. Talbot, M.R., Allen, P.A., 1996. Lakes. In Reading, H.G. Ed. , Sedimentary Environments Processes, Facies and Stratigraphy, 3rd ed. Blackwell Publishing, pp. 83 124. Tedeschi, L.R., 2017. Lower Cretaceous climate records and the correlation between marine and lacustrine settings Europe and South America . In Doctor of Philosophy Thesis. University of Oxford. Tedeschi, L.R., Jenkyns, H.C., Robinson, S.A., Sanjine s, A.E.S., Viviers, M.C., Quintaes, C.M.S.P., Vazquez, J.C., 2017. New age constraints on Aptian evaporites and carbonates from the South Atlantic implications for oceanic anoxic event 1a. Geology 45, 543 546. https doi.org 10.1130 G38886.1. Thompson, D.L., Stilwell, J.D., Hall, M., 2015. Lacustrine carbonate reservoir from Early Cretaceous rift lakes of Western Gondwana pre-salt coquinas of Brazil and West Africa. Gondwana Res. 28, 26 51. Tiercelin, J.J., Thouin, C., Kalala, T., Mondeguer, A., 1989. Discovery of sublacustrine hydrothermal activity and associated massive sulfides and hydrocarbons in the North Tanganyika trough, East African Rift. Geology 17, 1053 1056. Torsvik, T.H., Rousse, S., Labails, C., Smethhurst, M.A., 2009. A new scheme for the opening of the South Atlantic Ocean and the dissection of an Aptian salt basin. Geophys. J. Int. 177, 1315 1333. Tosca, N.J., Wright, V.P., 2015. Diagenetic pathways linked to labile Mg-clays in lacustrine carbonate reservoirs a model for the origin of secondary porosity in the Cretaceous pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, offshore Brazil. In Armitage, P.J., Butcher, A.R., Churchill, J.M., Csoma, A.E., Hollis, C., Lander, R.H., Omma, J.E., Worden, R.H. Eds. , Reservoir Quality of Clastic and Carbonate Rocks Analysis, Modelling and Predictions. 435. Geological Society of London Special Publications, pp. 39 47. Tosca, N.J., Tutolo, B., Wood, R., Huwald, N., 2018. Chemical Constraints on Carbonate Sedimentation and Fabric Development, Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazil. AAPG Annual Convention Exhibition 2018, Salt Lake City, Utah. Tritlla, J., Esteban, M., Loma, R., Mattos, A., Sa nchez, V., Boix, C., Luca, P.H.V., Carballo, J., Levresse, G., 2018. Carbonates That are no More Silicified Pre-Salt Oil Reservoirs in Campos Basin Brazil . AAPG Annual Convention Exhibition 2018, Salt Lake City, Utah. Tupinamba , M., Heilbron, M., Valeriano, C., Porto Junior, R., Blanco de Dios, F., Machado, N., Silva, L.G.E., Almeida, J.C.H., 2012. Juvenile contribution of the Neoproterozoic Rio Negro Magmatic Arc Ribeira Belt, Brazil implications for Western Gondwana amalgamation. Gondwana Res. 21, 422 438. Valladares, C.S., Machado, N., Heilbron, M., Duarte, B.P., Gauthier, G., 2008. Sedimentary provenance in the central Ribeira belt based on laser ablation ICPMS 207 Pb 206Pb zircon ages. Gondwana Res. 13, 516 526. Varmuza, K., Filzmoser, P., 2009. Introduction to Multivariate Statistical Analysis in Chemometrics. CRC Press, Boca Raton 321p . Viana, C.F., Gama Junior, E.G., Simo es, I.A., Moura, J.A., Fonseca, J.R., Alves, R.J., 1971. Revisa o estratigra fica da Bacia do Reco ncavo Tucano. Boletim Te cnico Petrobras 14, 157 192. Whatley, R., 1992. The reproductive and dispersal strategies of Cretaceous nonmarine Ostracoda the key to pandemism. In Aspects of Nonmarine Cretaceous Geology. Winter, W.R., Jahnert, R.J., Franc a, A.B., 2007. Bacia de Campos. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras 15, 511 529. Wright, V.P., 2012. Lacustrine carbonates in rift settings the interaction of volcanic and microbial processes on carbonate deposition. In Garland, J., Neilson, J.E., Laubach, S.E., Whidden, K.J. Eds. , Advances in Carbonate Exploration and Reservoir Analysis. 370. Geological Society of London Special Publications, pp. 39 47. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2015. An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic Early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates. In Bosence, D.W.J., Gibbons, K.A., Le Heron, D.P., Morgan, W.A., Pritchard, T., Vining, B.A. Eds. , Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. 418. Geological Society of London, Special Publications, pp. 209 219. Zala n, P.V., 2017. Five kilometers of Paleozoic sediments beneath the pre-salt of Santos Basin. In AAPG Search and Discovery Article 10915. Zala n, P.V., Oliveira, J.A.B., 2005. Origem e evoluc a o estrutural do sistema de riftes cenozoicos do sudeste do Brasil. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras 13, 269 300. International Symposium on Ostracoda, Developments in Palaeontology and Stratigraphy, pp. 1207 1216. Muniz, M.C., Bosence, D.W.J., 2015. Pre-salt microbialites from the Campos Basin offshore Brazil image log facies, facies model and cyclicity in lacustrine carbonates. In Bosence, D.W.J., Gibbons, K.A., Le Heron, D.P., Morgan, W.A., Pritchard, T., Vining, B.A. Eds. , Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. 418. Geological Society of London Special Publications, pp. 221 242. Ogg, J.G., Hinnov, L.A., Huang, C., 2012. Cretaceous. In Gradstein, F.M. Ed. , The Geologic Time Scale 2012. Elsevier, pp. 793 853. Ojiambo, S.B., Lyons, W.B., Welch, K.A., Poreda, R.J., Johannesson, K.H., 2003. Strontium isotopes and rare earth elements as tracers of groundwater lake water interactions, Lake Naivasha, Kenya. Appl. Geochem. 18, 1789 1805. Palmer, M.R., Edmond, J.M., 1989. The strontium isotope budget of the modern ocean. Earth Planet. Sci. 92, 11 26. Peate, D.W., Hawkesworth, C.J., 1996. Lithosperic to asthenospheric transition in low-Ti flood basalts from southern Parana , Brazil. Chem. Geol. 127, 1 24. Peate, D.W., Hawkesworth, C.J., Mantovani, M.M.S., Rogers, N.W., Turner, S.P., 1999. Petrogenesis and stratigraphy of the high-Ti Y Urubici magma type in the Parana flood basalt province and implications for the nature of Dupal -type mantle in the South Atlantic region. J. Petrol. 40, 451 473. Pentecost, A., 2005. Travertines. Springer-Verlag 449p . Pokorny , V., 1998. Ostracodes. In Haq, B.U., Boersma, A. Eds. , Introduction to Marine Micropaleontology, 2nd ed. Elsevier, pp. 109 149. Poropat, S.F., Colin, J.-P., 2012a. Early Cretaceous ostracod biostratigraphy of eastern Brazil and western Africa an overview. Gondwana Res. 22, 772 798. Poropat, S.F., Colin, J.-P., 2012b. Reassessment of the Early Cretaceous non-marine ostracod genera Hourcqia Kro mmelbein, 1965 and Pattersoncypris Bate, 1972 with the description of a new genus, Kroemmelbeincypris. J. Paleontol. 84, 700 720. Rangel, H.D., Carminatti, M., 2000. Rift lake stratigraphy of the Lagoa Feia Formation, Campos Basin, Brazil. In Gierlowski-Kordesch, E.H., Kelts, K.R. Eds. , Lake Basins Through Space and Time AAPG Studies in Geology. 46. pp. 225 244. Reeder, R.J., 1983. Crystal chemistry of the rhombohedral carbonates. In Reeder, R.J. Ed. , Carbonates Mineralogy and Chemistry. 11. Mineralogical Society of America Reviews in Mineralogy, pp. 1 47. Reston, T.J., 2010. The opening of the central segment of the South Atlantic symmetry and the extension discrepancy. Pet. Geosci. 16, 199 206. Rezende, M.F., Pope, M.C., 2015. Importance of depositional texture in pore characterization of subsalt microbialite carbonates, offshore Brazil. In Bosence, D.W.J., Gibbons, K.A., Le Heron, D.P., Morgan, W.A., Pritchard, T., Vining, B.A. Eds. , Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. 418. Geological Society of London Special Publications, pp. 193 207. Rhodes, M.K., Carroll, A.R., Pietras, J.T., Beard, B.L., Johnson, C.M., 2002. Strontium isotope record of paleohydrology and continental weathering, Eocene Green River Formation, Wyoming. Geology 30, 167 170. Richter, F.M., DePaolo, D.J., 1988. Diagenesis and Sr isotopic evolution of seawater using data from DSDP 590B and 575. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 90, 382 394. Richter, F.M., Liang, Y., 1993. The rate and consequences of Sr diagenesis in deep-sea carbonates. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 117, 553 565. Richter, F.M., Rowley, D.B., DePaolo, D.J., 1992. Sr isotope evolution of seawater the role of tectonics. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 109, 11 23. Rock, N.M.S., 1988. Numerical Geology A Source Guide, Glossary and Selective Bibliography to Geological Uses of Computers and Statistics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin. Rollinson, H., 1993. Using Geochemical Data Evaluation, Presentation, Interpretation. Longman Scientific Technical, Harlow 352p . Sabato Ceraldi, T., Green, D., 2016. Evolution of the South Atlantic lacustrine deposits in response to Early Cretaceous rifting, subsidence and lake hydrology. In Sabato Ceraldi, T., Hodgkinson, R.A., Backe, G. Eds. , Petroleum Geoscience of the West Africa Margin. 438 Geological Society of London Special Publications. Schaller, H., 1969. Revisa o estratigra fica da Bacia de Sergipe Alagoas. Boletim Te cnico da Petrobras 12, 21 86. Schmitt, R.S., Trouw, R.A.J., van Schmus, W.R., Passchier, C.W., 2008. Cambrian orogeny in the Ribeira belt SE Brazil and correlations within West Gondwana ties that bind underwater. In Pankhurst, R.J., Trouw, R.A.J., Brito Neves, B.B., de Wit, M.J. Eds. , West Gondwana Pre-Cenozoic Correlations Across the South Atlantic Region. 294. Geological Society of London Special Publications, pp. 276 296. Scholle, P.A., Ulmer-Scholle, D.S., 2003. A color guide to the petrography of carbonate rocks grains, textures, porosity, diagenesis. In AAPG Memoir. 77 Tulsa, Oklahoma . Scotchman, I.C., Gilchrist, G., Kusznir, N.J., Roberts, A.M., Fletcher, R., 2010. The breakup of the South Atlantic Ocean formation of failed spreading axes and blocks of thinned continental crust in the Santos Basin, Brazil and its consequences for petroleum system development. In Petroleum Geology Conference Series. 7. pp. 855 866. Silva-Telles, A.C., 1992. Novo zoneamento da seque ncia das coquinas da Formac a o Lagoa Feia Neojiquia da Bacia de Campos com base em ostracodes aspectos evolutivos. 80

[END_OF_PAPER]

PS Origin and Significance of Thick Carbonate Grainstone Packages in Non-Marine Successions A Case Study from the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin Andrew J. Barnett1, Michael Obermaier2, Joachim Amthor3, Kaluan Juk3, Raphael Camara3, Mohammad Sharafodin1, and Matt Bolton1 Search and Discovery Article 11116 2018 Posted September 17, 2018 Adapted from poster presentation given at 2018 AAPG Annual Convention Exhibition, Salt Lake City, Utah, May 20-23, 2018 Datapages 2018 Serial rights given by author. For all other rights contact author directly. 1 Shell, London, England, United Kingdom aandhbarnett yahoo.co.uk Shell, Rijswijk, Netherlands 3 Shell, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 2 Abstract Potential reservoir facies represented by lacustrine shoreline grainstones and rudstones are typically relatively thin compared to those from marine basins because of limited fetch, reducing wave action and producing a shallow wave base. This is especially the case in low gradient endorheic lakes, in which rapid lake level oscillations preclude the development of a stable shoreline. However, the closed lake deposits from the Cretaceous Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, locally have thick decametre-scale , continuous packages of grainstone and rudstone comprising fragments of crystal shrubs, spherulites, intraclasts and, in some cases, peloids and volcanic fragments. Grainstones and rudstones of this type occur in two distinct settings 1 the escarpment and dip slopes of tilted fault blocks along which a marked thinning of the Barra Velha Fm is evident, 2 apparent debris aprons adjacent to seismically resolvable mounds that developed on narrow elongate fault blocks. Grainstones and rudstones of the former are sharp-based packages, with fining-upwards trends, of well sorted and well-rounded grains, with mainly planar and low-angle stratification, but cross-lamination and planar cross-bedding is locally present. Paleocurrents are normal to paleoslope. These are interpreted as most likely carbonate fan delta shoreline deposits with wave reworked sheet flood or terminal splay deposits of alluvial fans. Those associated with dip slopes of half grabens are generally finer than those associated with scarp slopes which are also less mature in texture. Core plug measurements indicate porosities of up to 25 but moderate permeability ranging from 1 mD to ca. 100 mD. The grainstones associated with mound-like features are more coarsely textured, less mature and likely represent colluvial wedges as a result of the sub-aerial disaggregation of mounds formed largely of crystal shrubs. Core plug measurements indicate good reservoir quality with up to 25 porosity within predominantly intergranular pore space and permeabilities ranging from 10 mD to several Darcies. While much effort has focused on the origin of the in-situ constituents of the Barra Velha Formation, such as crystal shrub facies, numerous reservoirs are dominantly composed of more conventional re-worked, detrital deposits and constitute significant potential targets. Origin and significance of thick carbonate grainstone packages in non-marine successions a case study from the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin Andrew J. Barnett, Michael Obermaier, Joachim Amthor, Kaluan Juk, Raphael Camara, Mohammad Sharafodin, Matt Bolton Abstract Potential reservoir facies represented by lacustrine shoreline grainstones and rudstones are typically relatively thin compared to those from marine basins because of limited fetch, reducing wave action and producing a shallow wave base. This is especially the case in low gradient endorheic lakes, in which rapid lake level oscillations preclude the development of a stable shoreline. However, the closed lake deposits from the Cretaceous Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, locally have thick decametre-scale , continuous packages of grainstone and rudstone comprising fragments of crystal shrubs, spherulites, intraclasts and, in some cases, peloids and volcanic fragments. Grainstones and rudstones of this type occur in two distinct settings 1 the escarpment and dip slopes of tilted fault blocks along which a marked thinning of the Barra Velha Fm is evident 2 apparent debris aprons adjacent to seismically resolvable mounds that developed on narrow elongate fault blocks. Grainstones and rudstones of the former are sharp-based packages, with fining-upwards trends, of well sorted and well-rounded grains, with mainly planar and low-angle stratification, but cross-lamination and planar cross-bedding is locally present. Palaeocurrents are normal to palaeoslope. These are interpreted as most likely carbonate fan delta shoreline deposits with wave reworked sheet flood or terminal splay deposits of alluvial fans. Those associated with dip slopes of half grabens are generally finer than those associated with scarp slopes which are also less mature in texture. Core plug measurements indicate porosities of up to 25 but moderate permeability ranging from 1 mD to ca. 100 mD. The grainstones associated with mound-like features are more coarsely textured, less mature and likely represent colluvial wedges as a result of the sub-aerial disaggregation of mounds formed largely of crystal shrubs. Core plug measurements indicate good reservoir quality with up to 25 porosity within predominantly intergranular pore space and permeabilities ranging from 10 mD to several Darcies. While much effort has focused on the origin of the in-situ constituents of the Barra Velha Formation, such as crystal shrub facies, numerous reservoirs are dominantly composed of more conventional re-worked, detrital deposits and constitute significant potential targets. Introduction and Geological Setting The Barra Velha Formation of the Santos Basin is Aptian in age and lies within the Brazilian Alagoas Stage Fig. 1 Moreira et al. 2007 . It is bounded at its base by the Pre-Alagoas unconformity that separates the Alagoas from the underlying Jiquia Stage and the distinctive microbialite lake system from the older, lithologically more varied mollusc coquina-bearing lakes. It is overlain by the evaporites of the Ariri Formation, which marks the initial influx of marine waters into the Santos Basin Davison et al. 2012 . The Barra Velha Formation is also internally divisible by the Intra-Alagoas unconformity, which separates the informally defined Rift microbialite below from the Sag microbialite above. The thickness of the Barra Velha Formation varies significantly across the basin from 500 metres to 25 metres on fault block highs along which it may be locally absent. Evidence acquired to date supports a non-marine origin for the Barra Velha Formation Wright Barnett, 2015 1. Marine fossils are absent, including typical restricted marine indicators such as miliolid foraminifera. 2. Ostracods are locally present but are forms that have a wide salinity tolerance and appear to be non-marine. 3. Early sulphate minerals such as gypsum and anhydrite are absent, suggesting that the carbonates were not sourced from marine waters. 4. 87Sr 86Sr values are significantly more radiogenic than those for Cretaceous seawater Fig. 2 . Fig. 1 Stratigraphic chart for the Lower Cretaceous of the Santos Basin. Fig. 2 87Sr 86Sr curve for Cretaceous seawater and average 87Sr 86Sr values from the Barra Velha Formation. 2018 Shell International Exploration and Production B.V. Origin and significance of thick carbonate grainstone packages in non-marine successions a case study from the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin Andrew J. Barnett, Michael Obermaier, Joachim Amthor, Kaluan Juk, Raphael Camara, Mohammad Sharafodin, Matt Bolton Lithofacies and Cycles An examination and statistical analysis of 3 km of cored section shows that the basic components and facies described opposite Fig. 3 are arranged into decimeter- to metre-scale cycles cf. Wright Barnett, 2014, 2015 Fig. 4 . The basal portions of the cycles are composed of laminated calcimudstones with demonstrably early silica nodules and common vertebrate remains, including locally well-preserved fish. This facies association is interpreted to represent a flooding pluvial event and a resulting increase in lake level. This is supported by the matrix-supported texture of the facies, suggesting low energy conditions below both fair-weather and storm wave base. A freshening of lake waters is indicated by the presence of precompaction silica nodules silica precipitation is favoured by a lowering of alkalinity and an abundance of fish remains, including well-preserved whole fossils. Alkalinity of pH 9-10 is harmful to many extant freshwater fish and values 10 are typically lethal Alabaster Lloyd, 1980 compare conditions for precipitation of Mg-silicate clay below . The middle parts of the cycles are composed of spherulitedominated facies in-situ pseudo boundstones lacking Mgsilicate clay or floatstones with Mg-silicate clays for a discussion of the terminological problems associated with these textures see Wright Barnett, 2017a,b and or re-worked grainstones rudstones. Re-worked carbonate spherules also occur in wackestone packstone textures but are comparatively rare. The up-section transition from laminated calcimudstones to spherulite-dominated lithologies is transitional and is marked by rare laminae of carbonate spherules within the calcimudstones which become progressively more abundant, eventually forming the spherulite-dominated facies described above. This facies association is interpreted to represent evaporation of the lake water body and a concomitant decrease in lake level. This is suggested by the widespread presence of stevensite and other Mg-silicate clay minerals in this facies association. In fact, available evidence suggests that a Mgsilicate matrix was originally ubiquitous and was subsequently removed by dissolution Wright Barnett, 2015, 2017a,b . 3 - Shrubs Lithofacies Association 2- Spherulites Lithofacies Calcimudstones 1 A Massive to poorly laminated B Well-developed lamination with synsedimentary deformation features C Well-developed, planar lamination including normally graded laminae and varve-like lamination Spherulites 2 A Diagenetic spherulite pseudo boundstone in-situ B Spherulitic grainstone rudstone reworked C Spherulitic wackestone floatstone with clay matrix in-situ D Spherulitic wackestone packstone with micrite matrix re-worked Crystal Shrubs 4 - Microbialites The abiotic precipitation of stevensite would require elevated pH conditions of at least 9 or above in palaeo-lake water Jones, 1986 Khoury et al. 1982 Wilson 2013 . Tutulo Tosca 2018 suggest that spherulitic carbonates and Mg-silicate clays like those observed in the Barra Velha Formation were likely precipitation from elevated pH ca. 10-10.5 waters based on their real-time observations of in-situ fluid chemistry, post-experiment analysis of precipitated solids and geochemical modelling. That the spherulite-dominated facies association represents less hospitable, higher pH conditions is supported by the paucity of well-preserved vertebrates and their stratigraphic restriction to the lower parts of individual beds near or at the laminitespherulite transition. Progressive evaporation of a common water body is also suggested by carbon and oxygen stable isotope data. The isotopic composition of primary carbonates moves along a covariant trend in response to changes in hydrological balance and water residence times. Carbonates precipitated during periods of high lake level will in general plot towards the negative end of the trend, those precipitated during lake level lows towards the positive end Talbot, 1990 . This is exactly the trend shown by micro-sampled laminites and calcite spherules in the Barra Velha Formation. 5 - Grainstones 1 - Calcimudstones 3 A Shrub framestone or cementstone sensu Wright, 1992 in-situ B Shrub grainstone rudstone re-worked C Shrub framestone with clay matrix insitu D Shrub wackestone packstone with micrite matrix re-worked E Shrub framestone with tight, interlocking framework in-situ Microbialites 4 5 A Crinkly laminite B Stromatolitic boundstone C Thrombolitic boundstone D Oncoidal grainstone rudstone Grainstone Rudstone Intraclast-peloid grainstone rudstone Fig. 3 Basic components of the Barra Velha Formation and a proposed lithofacies scheme. The upper parts of the cycles are composed of shrub-dominated facies in-situ framestones or cementstones sensu Wright, 1992 , with or without Mg-silicate clay, and or re-worked grainstones rudstones. Re-worked shrubs also occur in wackestone packstone textures but, as with the spherulitedominated facies, are comparatively rare. The up-section transition from spherulite- to shrub-dominated facies is transitional and in some occurrences the two components are interlaminated giving a mixed shrub-spherulite facies. The transitional nature of this transition is also apparent at the porescale at which spherules are observed to become increasingly asymmetric representing a transitional spherule-shrub graintype. The palaeo-environmental conditions that tend to favour shrub precipitation over that of spherules are unclear. An additional facies forms the uppermost parts of the cycles but is only well-developed where the Barra Velha Formation shows marked thinning, in the up-dip areas of tilted fault blocks for example. 2018 Shell International Exploration and Production B.V. Fig. 4 Idealized metre-scale cycle showing vertical arrangement of basic components and lithofacies and typical C O stable isotope profile. Origin and significance of thick carbonate grainstone packages in non-marine successions a case study from the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin Andrew J. Barnett, Michael Obermaier, Joachim Amthor, Kaluan Juk, Raphael Camara, Mohammad Sharafodin, Matt Bolton Thick Carbonate Grainstones While much of the Barra Velha Formation can be interpreted in terms of the cycle model opposite, locally thick decametre-scale , continuous packages of grainstone and rudstone occur comprising fragments of crystal shrubs, spherulites, intraclasts and, in some cases, peloids and volcanic fragments. These cannot be readily explained by the cycle model because lacustrine shoreline grainstones and rudstones tend to be relatively thin compared to those from marine basins due to limited fetch reducing wave action and producing a shallow wave base. This effect is especially marked in low gradient endorheic lakes, in which rapid lake level oscillations preclude the development of a stable shoreline. Grainstones and rudstones of this type occur in two distinct settings 1 associated with unconformities on the escarpment and dip slopes of tilted fault blocks along which a marked thinning of the Barra Velha Fm is evident 2 apparent debris aprons adjacent to seismically resolvable mounds that developed on narrow elongate fault blocks. 1 Grainstones Associated with Unconformities and Stratal Thinning Grainstones and rudstones associated with unconformities and thinning of the Barra Velha Formation form sharp-based packages mostly showing fining-upwards trends. Grain-size is mainly medium- to coarse-grained but is locally up to granule- to pebble size in the rudstone textures at the base of fining-upwards packages. Grain-size also shows a relationship to structural setting with grainstones deposited on steeper escarpment slopes being coarse than those on gentler dip slopes. Component grains are generally well sorted and wellrounded. The dominant physical sedimentary structures are planar and low-angle stratification, but cross-lamination and planar cross-bedding is locally present. Palaeocurrents are normal to palaeoslope and show a radial pattern. Core plug measurements indicate porosities of up to 25 but moderate permeability ranging from 1 mD to ca. 100 mD. Dip slope Escarpment slope C 200 m B Cyclic lake deposits A Frequencies Grainstones of this type are interpreted as carbonate fan delta shorelines with wave reworked sheet flood or terminal splay deposits. This is consistent with the radial, palaeoslope-normal palaeocurrent patterns, the degree of grain abrasion and the thickness of the grainstone successions which would be more difficult to explain in a wholly lacustrine environment. The escarpment slope vs. dip slope grain-size variations are analogous to those observed in silicilclastic alluvial fan environments in which steeper depositional gradients are generally associated with coarser grain-size. N Cumulative Frequencies D 1m N E Degrees S Fig. 5 A Seismic section showing thinning of Barra Velha Fm on a tilted fault block. B Graphic logs of grainstone-dominated successions. C Representative photo-micrographs of grainstones. D Palaeocurrent data derived borehole image log interpretation E Depositional model for grainstone deposition showing association with basinward lacustrine facies. F Aerial image of the Newfoundland Mountain, Utah. Image courtesy of Google Earth. A partial analogue could be the Newfoundland Mountains of Utah where a tilted fault block sources alluvial fans that debouche into the Great Salt Lake. F 2 Grainstones Associated with Seismically-Resolvable Mounds Grainstones and rudstones of this type are interpreted as colluvial wedges or debris aprons formed as a result of the sub-aerial disaggregation of mounds formed largely of crystal shrubs. This is supported by their relative textural immaturity, predominantly monomictic grain composition, steep depositional dips and their association with seismically-resolvable mound-like features. A B C 400 m Deposits associated with seismically resolvable mound-like features comprise grainstones, rudstones and, less commonly, packstones and floatstones. The dominant grain-types are re-worked shrubs, with platy, angular and well-rounded intraclasts mainly comprising cm- to dm-scale fragments of in-situ shrub framestones. Re-worked spherulites occur but are distinctly less common than shrubs. Grain-size is mainly coarse- to very coarse-grained but up to granule- to pebble-grade and greater in rudstone textures. Sorting is poor to moderate with subrounded to rounded grains. Beds are normally graded but mainly lack internal stratification. Planar to low-angle lamination and, very rarely, crosslamination are locally developed. Bed contacts are sharp and planar or irregular, commonly with cmscale relief. Packages of beds commonly show elevated dips of ca. 20-40 . Core plug measurements indicate good reservoir quality with up to 25 porosity within predominantly intergranular pore space and permeabilities ranging from 10 mD to several Darcies. D Cyclic lake deposits Mound E Fig. 6 A Seismic section showing mound-like features and intervening flat-lying lake deposits B Graphic log of grainstone-dominated succession. C Representative photo-micrographs of grainstones. D Depositional model for grainstone deposition showing association with mounds and adjacent cyclic lacustrine facies. E Field photographs of tufa mounds from Searles lake, California. Photographs courtesy of Xuan Guo see Guo Chafetz, 2012, Fig.1 . A partial analogue could be the tufa mounds of Searles Lake cf. Guo 2012 which are 2018 Shell Chafetz, International Exploration and Production B.V. flanked by prominent debris aprons produced by the weathering of tufa deposits. Grainstone-dominated fault block crest Origin and significance of thick carbonate grainstone packages in non-marine successions a case study from the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin Andrew J. Barnett, Michael Obermaier, Joachim Amthor, Kaluan Juk, Raphael Camara, Mohammad Sharafodin, Matt Bolton References Alabaster, J.S. Lloyd, 1980. Water quality criteria for freshwater fish. Butterworths, London, U.K. Davison, I., Anderson, L. Nuttall, P. 2012. Salt deposition, loading and gravity drainage in the Campos and Santos salt basins. In Alsop, G.I. et al. eds. Salt Tectonics, Sediments and Prospectivity. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 363, 159-173. Guo, X. Chafetz, H.S. 2012. Large tufa mounds, Searles Lake, California. Sedimentology, 59, 1509-1535. Jones, B.F. 1986. Clay mineral diagenesis in lacustrine settings. In Mumpton, F.A. ed. Studies in Diagenesis. U.S. Geological Survey, Reston, VA, Bulletins, 1578, 291-300. Khoury, N.H., Eberl, D.D. Jones, B.F. 1982. Origin of magnesium clays from the Amargosa Desert, Nevada. Clays and Clay Minerals, 30, 327-336. Moreira, J.L.P. et al. 2007. Bacia de Santos. Boletin Geociencias Petrobras, 15, 531-549. Talbot, M.R. 1990. A review of the palaeohydrological interpretation of carbon and oxygen isotopic ratios in primary lacustrine carbonates. Chemical Geology, 80, 261-279. Tosca , N.J. Wright, V.P. 2015. Diagenetic pathways linked to labile Mg-clays in lacustrine carbonate reservoirs a model for the origin of secondary porosity in the Cretaceous pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, offshore Brazil. In Armitage, P.J. et al. eds. Reservoir Quality of Clastic and Carbonate Rocks Analysis, Modelling and Prediction. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 435. Tutulo, B.M. Tosca, N.J. 2018. Experimental examination of Mg-silicate carbonate system at ambient temperature implications for alkaline chemical sedimentation and lacustrine carbonate formation. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 225, 80-101. Wilson, M.J. 2013. Sheet silicates Clay Minerals. Volume 3C Rock Forming Minerals. Geological Society, London. Wright, V.P. Barnett, A.J. 2014. Cyclicity and carbonate-silicate gel interactions in Cretaceous alkaline lakes. Search Discovery Article 51011. AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition, Houston, Texas, April 6th-9th, 2014. Wright, V.P. Barnett, A.J. 2015. An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates. In Bosence, D.W.J. et al. eds. Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 418, 209-219. Wright, V.P. Barnett, A.J. 2017a. Classifying reservoir carbonates when the status quo simply does not work a case study from the Cretaceous of the South Atlantic. Search Discovery Article 51419. AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition, Houston, Texas, April 2nd-5th, 2017. Wright, V.P. Barnett, A.J. 2017b. Critically evaluating the current depositional models for the pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, offshore Brazil. Search Discovery Article 51439. AAPG SEG International Conference and Exhibition, London, October 15th-18th, 2017. Wright, V.P. 1992. A revised classification of limestones. Sedimentary Geology, 76, 177-185. 2018 Shell International Exploration and Production B.V.

[END_OF_PAPER]

Downloaded 11 23 17 to 200.20.12.46. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright see Terms of Use at http library.seg.org Mapping of Carbonate Mounds in the Brazilian Pre-Salt Zone Carlos Jesus , Petrogal Brasil Maria Olho Azul, Petrogal Brasil Wagner Moreira Lupinacci, UFF Leandro Machado, Paradigm. Summary Brazil began oil production from its pre-salt carbonate reservoirs in 2008. Recently, these reservoirs have reached an incredible output of 1.53 million barrels of oil equivalent per day boed , representing more than half of the country s daily production. The rapid and high increase in oil production demonstrates how important these carbonate reservoirs are to Brazil. The Brazilian pre-salt oil fields are in an exploration and development phase, which requires an understanding of the complex geology of these areas. There are many challenges for characterizing carbonate rocks given their high spatial heterogeneity and complex pore systems. The main objective of this study was to propose a workflow for identifying and characterizing carbonate bodies, using a combination of structural attributes and the hybrid spectral decomposition method on these potential targets in the exploration of hydrocarbons. Introduction Carbonate mounds are potential oil-producing systems in many fields. Identifying and characterizing carbonate mounds in the Brazilian Pre-Salt, below complex and thick evaporite deposits, are considerable challenges for geoscientists. One of the major problems is seismic illumination of subsalt layers. Carbonate reservoirs in these areas are difficult to identify and delineate using seismic data because of their complex pattern of facies and the absence of impedance contrast between the reservoir and the sealing facies Zheng, 2007 . Seismic attenuation can greatly affect the quality of the seismic signal at considerable depths because of cumulative effects during down-going and up-going wave-field propagation Lupinacci and Oliveira, 2015 , making data preconditioning crucial Lupinacci et al., 2017 . According to Chopra and Marfurt 2007 , a seismic attribute is any measure of the seismic data that helps to visually enhance or quantify features of interest. Seismic attributes are important tool used for reservoir characterization. However, selection of seismic attributes should be made with caution so as not to propagate false interpretations. Carbonate mounds are complex sedimentary bodies that can be characterized by a combination of seismic patterns. Generally, their seismic facies are associated with chaotic, subparallel, wavy and concave seismic patterns Carrillat, 2002 . Seismic multiattributes analysis can contribute to identifying these patterns. 2017 SEG SEG International Exposition and 87th Annual Meeting Coherence attributes that compare neighboring seismic traces based on waveforms using cross-correlation, semblance, and eigen structure measures along the dip and azimuth of seismic reflectors have been developed Bahorich and Farmer, 1995 Marfurt et al., 1998 Marfurt et al., 1999 Gerztenkorn and Marfurt, 1999 . In recent years, coherence attributes have been applied to the margins of the Atlantic Basin in order to obtain accurate imaging profiles of the fault patterns infor hydrocarbon reservoirs that are difficult to identify from seismic reflectivity data. The curvature attribute is a two-dimensional property that describes how bent a curve is at a particular point along its length Roberts, 2001 , focusing more on changes in shape rather than amplitude. Thus, this attribute is not affected by variation of amplitude in relation to fluids nor changes in lithology, so it is a good identifier of faults, as well as anticline and syncline structures Pascal, 2008 . However, the curvature attribute is sensitive to noise. Curvature attributes can increase confidence in the coherence results from geological analyses. Spectral decomposition is another widely-used attribute. In seismic data, it can represent the seismic trace in a frequency domain or in sub-bands of frequencies. It can identify subtle thickness variations and discontinuities, as well as also accurately and quantitatively predict bedding thicknesses e.g. Partyka, 1999 . Low-frequency shadow is also used as a hydrocarbon indicator when applying the spectral decomposition attribute in hydrocarbon detection studies Sun et al., 2002 Wang, 2007 . Additionally, a hybrid spectral decomposition attribute basically uses the result of spectral decomposition and selects the most important frequency bandwidth, which may be related to reservoir facies. Then, a specific amplitude range that represents a reservoir anomaly can be isolated. Here, we propose a workflow for identifying and extracting mound geobodies in carbonate reservoirs. Our workflow uses the coherence and dip curvature structural attributes, combined with hybrid spectral decomposition. We successfully apply this workflow to reduce uncertainty in a static model of the Brazilian Pre-Salt reservoirs. Page 3298 Mapping of Carbonate Mounds in the Brazilian Pre-Salt Downloaded 11 23 17 to 200.20.12.46. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright see Terms of Use at http library.seg.org Methodology and Results High-resolution seismic data enable visualization and quantitative analysis of geometry, orientation, and spatial distribution of carbonate mounds Ruf, 2012 . Identification of geometric features, as well as mounds, is a considerable challenge in the Brazilian Pre-Salt formations due to difficulties in imaging seismic facies below large salt structures. Mapping of carbonate mounds would improve the ability to predict possible areas for hydrocarbon exploration. The workflow we used for characterization of carbonate mounds is shown in Figure 1. In this workflow, the seismic data is preconditioned to optimize the attribute calculations, to improve the signal noise ratio, and to increase vertical resolution. To do this, Structure Oriented Filtering SOF is used on the Reverse Time Migration RTM seismic volume to reduce noise and to improve the continuity, termination and geometry of events, which allows better definition of the reservoir architecture. We then calculated the Dip Curvature Attributes. Curvatures attributes are very susceptible to noise, which is why we calculated them after SOF. Spectral decomposition and hybrid spectral decomposition parameters were also obtained after applying SOF to maintain the original amplitude proportionality and thereby preserve the reservoir anomalies. 2. Identification of the frequency that characterized the anomaly of interest 3. Calculation of the RMS amplitude 4. Identification of the amplitude anomaly. best Stage 2 Isolation of anomalies that can be associated with mounds 1. Application of a Short Window Fourier Transformation approach using a Hanning filter. 2. Selection of the frequency of interest based on the Stage 1 analysis described above. In this work, we used 8 Hz as a central frequency 3. Calculation of the Envelope attribute 4. Isolation of the amplitudes of anomalies associated with carbonate mounds. We obtained a hybrid spectral decomposition following Stage 2. Figure 2 shows the spectral decomposition and hybrid spectral decomposition on the structural map of the top of the reservoir. Figure 1 Workflow for preconditioning seismic data prior to characterization of carbonate mounds. Calculation and analysis of the hybrid spectral decomposition attribute can be divided into two stages Stage 1 amplitude and frequency analysis, and Stage 2 isolation of anomalies that can be associated with mounds. Stage 1 Amplitude and frequency analysis. The following steps were applied to the reservoir interval with well logs used as a quality control 1. Calculation of the dominant frequency 2017 SEG SEG International Exposition and 87th Annual Meeting Figure 2 a Spectral decomposition with a central frequency of 8 Hz. b Result of our hybrid spectral decomposition, isolating the carbonate mounds. Page 3299 Downloaded 11 23 17 to 200.20.12.46. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright see Terms of Use at http library.seg.org Mapping of Carbonate Mounds in the Brazilian Pre-Salt In our workflow, spectral enhancement or image enhancement was applied before calculating the coherence attribute. The main objective of image enhancement is to improve seismic resolution by increasing the frequency bandwidth. This process does not create new frequencies it only enhances the contributions of the weak frequencies that already exist in the seismic data. The coherence and dip curvature attributes calculated on the structural map of the top of the reservoir are shown in Figure 3. logs used as a quality control parameter. We could then classify the seismic facies using the coherence, dip curvature and hybrid spectral decomposition attributes as input data for an unsupervised neural network algorithm, this classification is based entirely on the internal structure of the seismic data, and the resulting facies map is indicative of the reservoir heterogeneity e.g., channel limits and orientation, or high- and low-porosity regions , Saggaf 1999 . We also applied principal component analysis PCA to identify lateral variation in the carbonate reservoir. Finally, after classification of the seismic facies, it was possible to identify and isolate the carbonate mounds. In Figure 4, the features that represent these mounds are clearly visible. In order to optimize the extraction process, automatic detection is limited to the top and base of the reservoir. Figure 5 shows the geobody of the carbonate mounds. Figure 4 Structural map of the top of the reservoir, highlighting the carbonate mounds. Figure 3 Coherence a and dip curvature attributes b calculated on the structural map of the top of the reservoir. We then grouped the seismic facies for several regions of the reservoirs based on the seismic patterns, with the well 2017 SEG SEG International Exposition and 87th Annual Meeting Page 3300 Mapping of Carbonate Mounds in the Brazilian Pre-Salt and mitigated some uncertainties from the complex geology of the pre-salt zone. Downloaded 11 23 17 to 200.20.12.46. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright see Terms of Use at http library.seg.org Conclusions A combination of structural attributes and hybrid spectral decomposition successfully characterized carbonate reservoirs. Our results are corroborated by well logs, demonstrating the efficiency of this method in the complex environment of the Brazilian Pre-Salt. Our workflow allowed extraction of the geobody of the carbonate mounds Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank Petrogal Brasil for providing data and support, especially the Exploration and Development Group. Figure 5 Geobody of carbonate mounds. 2017 SEG SEG International Exposition and 87th Annual Meeting Page 3301 Downloaded 11 23 17 to 200.20.12.46. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright see Terms of Use at http library.seg.org EDITED REFERENCES Note This reference list is a copyedited version of the reference list submitted by the author. Reference lists for the 2017 SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts have been copyedited so that references provided with the online metadata for each paper will achieve a high degree of linking to cited sources that appear on the Web. REFERENCES Bahorich, M.S., and S. L. Farmer, 1995, 3-D seismic discontinuity for faults and stratigraphic features The coherence cube The Leading Edge, 14, 1053 1058, http dx.doi.org 10.1190 1.1437077. Cao, J., and J. D. Brewer, 2013, Critical reflection illumination analysis Interpretation, 1, T57 T61, http dx.doi.org 10.1190 INT-2013-0031.1. Carrillat, A., T. Randen, L. Sonneland, and G. Elvebakk, 2002, Automated mapping of carbonate mounds using 3D seismic texture attributes 72th Annual International Meeting, SEG, Expanded Abstracts, 552 555, http dx.doi.org 10.1190 1.1817308. Castagna, J. P., S. Sun, and R. W. Siegfried, 2003, Instantaneous spectral analysis Detection of lowfrequency shadows associated with hydrocarbons The Leading Edge, 22, 120 127, http dx.doi.org 10.1190 1.1559038. Chopra, S., 2002, Coherence Cube and beyond First Break 20, 27 33, http dx.doi.org 10.1046 j.13652397.2002.00225.x. Gersztenkorn, A., and Marfurt, K. J., 1999, Eigen structure based coherence computations as an aid to 3D structural and stratigraphic mapping Geophysics, 64, 1468 1479, http dx.doi.org 10.1190 1.1444651. Klein, P., L. Richard, and H. James, 2008, 3D curvature attributes A new approach for seismic interpretation First Break, 26, 105 111. Lupinacci, W. M., Franco, A. P., Oliveira, S. A. M., Moraes, F. S., 2017, A combined time-frequency filtering strategy for Q-factor compensation of poststack seismic data Geophysics, 82, no. 1, V1 V6, http dx.doi.org 10.1190 GEO2015-0470.1. Lupinacci, W. M., and S. A. M. Oliveira, 2015, Q factor estimation from the amplitude spectrum of the time-frequency transform of stacked reflection seismic data Journal of Applied Geophysics, 114, 202 209, http dx.doi.org 10.1016 j.jappgeo.2015.01.019. Marfurt, K. J., R. J. Kirlin, R. J. Farmer, and M. S. Bahorich, 1998, 3-D seismic attributes using a semblance-based coherency algorithm Geophysics, 63, 1150 1165, http dx.doi.org 10.1190 1.1444415. Marfurt, K. J., V. Sudhaker, A. Gersztenkorn, K. D. Crawford, and S. E. Nissen, 1999, Coherency calculations in the presence of structural dip Geophysics, 64, 104 111, http dx.doi.org 10.1190 1.1444508. Masaferro, J. L., R. Bourne, and J. C. Jauffred, 2004, Three-dimensional seismic visualization of carbonate reservoir and structures, in seismic imaging of carbonate reservoirs and system AAPG Memoir 81, 11 41. Partyka, G., J. Gridley, and J. Lopez, 1999, Interpretational applications of spectral decomposition in reservoir characterization The Leading Edge, 18, 353 360, http dx.doi.org 10.1190 1.1438295. Roberts, A., 2001, Curvature attributes and their application to 3D interpreted horizons First Break, 19, 85 100, http dx.doi.org 10.1046 j.0263-5046.2001.00142.x. Ruf, A. S., T. Simo, T. M. Hughes, and K. Steffen, 2008, Insights on the evolution of oligocenemiocene carbonate buildups from 3D seismic data, East Java Basin, Indonesia 70th EAGE Conference and Exhibition incorporating SPE EROPEC 2008, http dx.doi.org 10.3997 22144609.20147548. 2017 SEG SEG International Exposition and 87th Annual Meeting Page 3302 Downloaded 11 23 17 to 200.20.12.46. Redistribution subject to SEG license or copyright see Terms of Use at http library.seg.org Taner, M. T., 2001, Seismic attributes CSEG Recorder, 26, 48 56. Wang, Y., 2007. Seismic time-frequency spectral decomposition by matching pursuit Geophysics, 72, no. 1, V13 V20, http dx.doi.org 10.1190 1.2387109. Zheng, X., Y. Li, J. Li, and X. Yu, 2007, Reef and shoal reservoir characterization using paleogeomorpology constrained seismic attribute analysis 77th Annual International Meeting, SEG, Expanded Abstracts, 1382 1386, http dx.doi.org 10.1190 1.2792757. 2017 SEG SEG International Exposition and 87th Annual Meeting View publication stats Page 3303

[END_OF_PAPER]

6 Barnett, A. J., M. Obermaier, J. Amthor, M. Sharafodin, M. Bolton, D. Clarke, and R. Camara, 2021, Origin and significance of thick carbonate grainstone packages in nonmarine successions A case study from the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazil, in Marcio R. Mello, Pinar O. Yilmaz, and Barry J. Katz, eds., The supergiant Lower Cretaceous pre-salt petroleum systems of the Santos Basin, Brazil AAPG Memoir 124, p. 155 174. Origin and Significance of Thick Carbonate Grainstone Packages in Nonmarine Successions A Case Study from the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazil A. J. Barnett 1, M. Obermaier 2, J. Amthor 3, M. Sharafodin 1, M. Bolton 1, D. Clarke 1, and R. Camara3 1 Shell, 20 York Road, London, U.K., SE17NA e-mails andrew.barnett shell.com michael.obermaier shell .com m.bolton shell.com dan.clark shell.com 2 Shell, Carel van Bylandtlaan 16, 2596 HR, The Hague, Netherlands e-mail michael.obermaier shell.com 3 Shell, Brasil Petro leo Ltda, Av. Repu blica do Chile, 330, CEP 20031-170, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil e-mails joachim.j.amthor shell.com raphael.camara shell.com ABSTRACT Potential reservoir facies represented by lacustrine shoreline grainstones and rudstones are typically relatively thin compared to those from marine basins because of limited fetch and reduced wave action producing a shallow wave base. This is especially the case in low- gradient endorheic lakes in which rapid lake-level oscillations preclude the development of a stable shoreline. However, the closed lake deposits of the Barra Velha Formation locally have thick decameter-scale continuous packages of grainstones and rudstones comprising fragments of crystal shrubs, spherulites, intraclasts, and, in some cases, peloids and volcanic fragments. Grainstones and rudstones of this type occur on the escarpment and dip slopes of tilted fault blocks along which a marked thinning of the Barra Velha Formation is evident. They mainly consist of sharp-based, decimeter-to-meter scale, fining-upward packages with well-sorted and well-rounded grains, planar low-angle lamination and, less commonly, cross-lamination and planar cross-bedding. Those that occur on dip slopes are generally finer than those associated with escarpment slopes, the latter also being texturally less mature. At the formation scale, grainstone-dominated successions show radial depositional dip azimuth patterns orientated normal to paleoslope. The grainstones are interpreted as wave-dominated fan-delta shoreline deposits. Although much effort has focused on the origin of the in situ components of the Barra Velha Formation, such as crystal shrub facies, detrital deposits of the type documented here constitute significant potential targets. Copyright 2021 by The American Association of Petroleum Geologists. DOI 10.1306 13722318MSB.6.1853 155 156 BARNETT ET AL. INTRODUCTION The pre-salt successions of the Santos Basin contain estimated recoverable hydrocarbon volumes in excess of 30 BBOE according to Agencia Nacional do Petroleo . The majority of these volumes are hosted in the Barra Velha Formation BVF . Consequently, the BVF and equivalent units have been the focus of considerable research efforts, not just in Brazilian basins but also along the conjugate margin e.g., Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2020 Saller et al., 2016 Herlinger et al., 2017 Sabato Ceraldi and Green, 2017 Farias et al., 2019 Lima and De Ros, 2019 . However, most of this research has been aimed at understanding the unusual in situ carbonate components despite the fact that these are commonly reworked and locally form thick decameter-scale successions of detrital deposits, which can also have good reservoir properties Barnett et al., 2018 . Explaining thick decameter-scale , continuous packages of grain-supported detrital carbonate rocks in apparent lacustrine settings is difficult because the limited fetch that characterizes lacustrine basins compared to marine basins results in reduced wave action and a relatively shallow wave base. This effect is especially marked in low-gradient endorheic lakes in which rapid lake-level oscillations preclude the development of a stable shoreline Talbot and Allen, 1996 . As a result, lacustrine shoreline g rainstones tend to be relatively thin, the thickest units ca. 14 m known to the authors being those documented by Milroy and Wright 2000 . The aim of this chapter is to document the structural and stratigraphic setting of thick, stacked successions of grainstones and rudstones from a producing field in the Santos Basin Figure 1 and, based on their Figure 1. Base salt top reservoir structure map showing the structure and the location of the wells used in this study. Contour interval is 100 m. A A is the line of the seismic section shown in Figure 4. Origin and Significance of Thick Carbonate Grainstone Packages in Nonmarine Successions Barra Velha Formation 157 sedimentological characteristics, propose a depositional model for their genesis. GEOLOGICAL SETTING The BVF of the Santos Basin Figure 2 is Aptian in age and lies within the Brazilian Alagoas stage Moreira et al., 2007 see Tedeschi et al., 2017, for an alternative age interpretation . It is underlain by the Pre- Alagoas unconformity PAU that separates the Alagoas from the underlying Jiquia stage. Published studies to date suggest that the formation is mainly lacustrine in origin Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2020 Pietzsch et al., 2018 Farias et al., 2019 but differs from the older and more heterogeneous bivalve coquina- bearing lake deposits of the Itapema Formation and is overlain by the evaporites of the Ariri Formation representing the initial influx of seawater into the S antos Basin Davison et al., 2012 . Within the BVF there is also an intraformational unconformity, the Intra- Alagoas unconformity IAU . However, the same basic facies occur either side of this surface, although their proportions may vary. The BVF ranges in thickness from less than 25 m or is missing on fault-block highs to greater than 550 m Barnett et al., 2018 . Evidence acquired to date supports a nonmarine origin for the BVF Wright and Barnett, 2015 Pietzsch et al., 2018 1. Marine fossils are absent, including typical restricted marine indicators such as miliolid foraminifera. 2. Ostracods are locally present, and all documented taxa are nonmarine. 3. Early sulfate minerals such as gypsum and anhydrite are absent, suggesting that the carbonates were not sourced from marine waters. 4. 87Sr 86Sr values are significantly more radiogenic than those for Cretaceous seawater. Following deposition in a synrift to sag-tectonic setting, the BVF and its equivalents were buried by more than 1 km of marine evaporites of the Ariri Formation, because the Albian ocean expanded into the basin. Figure 2. Lower Cretaceous stratigraphic chart for the Santos Basin after Moreira et al., 2007 Winter et al., 2007 . 158 BARNETT ET AL. THE BARRA VELHA FORMATION Although the main components have been discussed by Wright and Barnett 2015 when there were restrictions on publishing images, since then several authors have described and illustrated similar textures from the BVF in the Santos Basin Tanaka et al., 2018 Farias et al., 2019 Wright and Barnett, 2020 and equivalents of the BVF in the Campos and Kwanza basins Saller et al., 2016 Herlinger et al., 2017 Sabato Ceraldi and Green, 2017 Lima and De Ros, 2019 . Terra et al. 2010 also provided core and photomicrograph images of the key components. These basic components and their mode of occurrence can be used to define a lithofacies scheme, as shown in Table 1, and are described in more detail below. The BVF carbonates typically consist of a c entimeter-to-decimeter bedded, highly heterogeneous mix of in situ and reworked grains and a mineralogy comprising calcite, dolomite, Mg-silicate clays mainly stevensite and talc , silica, and commonly significant porosity. The dominant primary calcite components consist of in situ and reworked material of two basic types millimeter-to-centimeter sized fascicular structures resembling crystal shrubs Lithofacies Association 3, Table 1 , locally present as Lithofacies Association millimeter-thick laminae of coalesced fibrous calcite, and millimeter-scale spherulites Wright and Barnett 2015 Figures 3 7 Lithofacies Association 2, Table 1 . These two components, in their in situ or reworked forms, are commonly interbedded with laminated calcimudstones Lithofacies Association 1, Table 1 see discussion below . Despite the common informal use of the term to denote the BVF, microbialites, in the sense of Burne and Moore 1987 , are exceedingly rare in the BVF Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2020 but do occur as m icrobial crinkly laminites, stromatolites, thrombolites, and oncoids Lithofacies Association 4, Table 1 and appear almost exclusively in the uppermost 20 30 m of the formation the so-called Lula s Fingers . Wright and Barnett 2015, 2020 provided values for the frequency of microbial macrostructures and microstructures in the large set of BVF samples they studied, emphasizing the rarity of such material. An examination and statistical analysis of greater than 3 km of core material show that the basic components and facies of the BVF are arranged into decimeter-to meter scale cycles Wright and Barnett 2015 Barnett et al., 2018 Figure 3 . The basal parts of the cycles are composed of laminated calcimudstones with demonstrable early silica nodules and Lithofacies 1 Calcimudstones A Massive to poorly laminated B Well-developed lamination with syn-sedimentary deformation features C Well-developed, planar lamination including normally graded laminae and varve-like lamination 2 Spherulites A Diagenetic pseudo boundstone in situ B Grainstone rudstone reworked C Wackestone floatstone with clay matrix in situ D Wackestone packstone with micrite matrix reworked 3 Crystal Shrubs A Shrub framestone or cementstone sensu Wright, 1992 in situ B Shrub grainstone rudstone reworked C Shrub framestone with clay matrix in situ D Shrub wackestone packstone with micrite matrix reworked E Shrub framestone with tight, interlocking framework in situ Microbialites 4 5 A Crinkly laminite B Stromatolitic boundstone C Thrombolitic boundstone D Oncoidal grainstone rudstone Grainstone Rudstone Intraclast peloid grainstone rudstone Table 1. Lithofacies Scheme for the Barra Velha Formation Based on Grain Type and Depositional Texture. The Focus of This Chapter Is Lithofacies Association 5. Origin and Significance of Thick Carbonate Grainstone Packages in Nonmarine Successions Barra Velha Formation 159 common vertebrate remains, including locally well-preserved fish. These facies are interpreted to represent a flooding pluvial event and a resulting increase in lake level. This is supported by the matrix-supported texture of the facies, suggesting low-energy conditions below both fair weather and storm wave base. A freshening of lake waters is i ndicated by the p resence of pre-compaction silica nodules silica p recipitation is favored by a lowering of alkalinity , an abundance of fish remains, i ncluding well-preserved whole fossils, and ostracods. An a lkalinity of pH 9 10 is harmful to many extant freshwater fish and values greater than 10 are typically lethal Alabaster and Lloyd, 1980 . The middle parts of the cycles are c omposed of spherulite-dominated facies. The up- s ection tr a n s i t i o n f ro m l a m i n a t e d c a l c i m u d s t o n e t o spherulite-dominated lithologies is transitional and is marked by rare laminae of carbonate spherulites within calcimudstones, which become p rogressively more abundant, eventually forming the s pherulite-dominated facies described earlier. This facies association is interpreted to represent evaporation of the lake water body and a concomitant decrease in lake level. This is suggested by the widespread presence of stevensite and other M g- silicate clay m inerals in this facies association. The abiotic precipitation of stevensite would require elevated pH conditions of at least 9 or above in paleolake water Khoury et al., 1982 Jones, 1986 Wilson, 2013 . Tutolo and Tosca 2018 suggested that spherulitic carbonates and Mg-silicate clays like those observed in the BVF were likely precipitated from elevated pH ca. 10 10.5 waters based on their real-time observations of in situ fluid chemistry, post-experiment analysis of precipitated solids, and geochemical modeling. That the spherulite-dominated facies association represents less hospitable, higher pH conditions is supported by the paucity of well-preserved vertebrates and their stratigraphic restriction to the lower parts of individual beds near or at the l aminite spherulite transition. Progressive evaporation of a common water body is also suggested by carbon and oxygen stable isotope data Barnett et al., 2018 . The isotopic composition of primary carbonates moves along a covariant trend in response to changes in Figure 3. Idealized cycle showing the vertical arrangement of grain types and basic components in the Barra Velha Formation BVF together with a typical carbon and oxygen stable isotope profile. The depositional textures within which the different grain types occur may vary as shown in Table 1. LA Lithofacies Association. 160 BARNETT ET AL. hydrological balance and water residence times. Carbonates precipitated during periods of high lake level will in general plot toward the negative end of the trend, those precipitated during lake-level lows toward the positive end Talbot, 1990 . This is exactly icrosampled laminites and calthe trend shown by m cite spherulites in the BVF Barnett et al., 2018 . The upper parts of the cycles are composed of shrub-dominated facies. The up-section change from spherulite- to shrub-dominated facies is transitional, and in some occurrences, the two components are interlaminated giving a mixed shrub spherulite facies. The gradual nature of this transition is also apparent at the pore scale at which spherulites are observed to become increasingly asymmetric, representing a transitional spherulite shrub grain type. The shrub-dominated facies of Lithofacies Association 3 are locally overlain by sharp-based beds of intraclast peloid grainstone Lithofacies Association 5 . This latter lithofacies association is the focus of this chapter and is described in detail in subsequent sections. DATA SET AND METHODOLOGY The seismic data set used in this study are a full stack Kirchhoff PSDM pre-stack depth migration acquired in 2008 and processed in 2011. This is supplemented by wireline log data, from four wells, here named as wells A, B, C, and D Figure 1 . Core was taken from well A and well C 111.8 m in total from the upper part of the BVF. This has been supplemented by 251 rotary sidewall cores from wells B, C, and D. Each of the cores has been described at 1 50 scale. One hundred and ninety-seven core plug trims and all the side wall cores SWC trims have been examined and described petrographically. Borehole image BHI logs were acquired and interpreted from wells A and C. The BHI types used for interpretation were Baker Atlas Earth Imager and Circumferential Borehole Imaging Log EI and CBIL well A and Schlumberger s Ultrasonic Borehole Imager UBI well C . Borehole image log data were loaded, processed, and quality checked in TerraStation. Manual dips were then calculated directly from the images using TerraSciences software. Structural dip was defined by well-bedded intervals assumed to have originally been deposited horizontally e.g., shales, mudstones, well-bedded carbonates . The resulting structural dip was then removed from the manual dip data set to produce a derotated or residual dip data set, which should best represent the depositional attitude of bedding. THICK CARBONATE GRAINSTONES Although much of the BVF can be interpreted in terms of the cycle model described earlier, locally thick decameter-scale , continuous packages of grainstones and rudstones occur comprising fragments of crystal shrubs, spherulites, intraclasts, and, in some cases, peloids and volcanic fragments. These thick vertical successions of detrital grain-supported carbonate cannot be readily explained by simple cycles of lake-level increase followed by progressive evaporation prior to the next flooding event. Barnett et al. 2018 suggested that grainstones and rudstones of this type occur in two distinct structural and stratigraphic settings 1. Associated with unconformities on the escarpment and dip slopes of tilted fault blocks along which a marked thinning of the BVF is evident. 2. Apparent debris aprons adjacent to seismically resolvable mounds that developed on narrow, elongate fault blocks. In this chapter we will limit our focus to the first of these. The reader is referred to Barnett et al. 2018 for more details of the second. GRAINSTONES ASSOCIATED WITH UNCONFORMITIES AND STRATAL THINNING Description The grainstones documented in this chapter Lithofacies Association 5, Table 1 occur where the BVF progressively onlaps tilted fault blocks comprising older sedimentary or volcanic rocks as in Figure 4. In this tectono-stratigraphic setting, the BVF thins significantly on the fault block crest. Well p enetrations have locally proven as little as 25 m of BVF overlying volcanic rocks of the Camboriu Formation. Core and SWC data show that in areas where the BVF thins in this way, the more commonly encountered cyclic successions described earlier are rare and instead successions dominated by grainstones and rudstones occur. As already noted, these successions are thin on fault block crests but thicken off structure, both on the dip and escarpment slope, such that successions more than 100 m thick occur, which are greater than 50 composed of grain- supported detrital carbonates of the type described next Figure 5 . Grainstones and rudstones associated with unconformities and thinning of the BVF form decimeter-to-meter scale mean thickness 0.87 m Origin and Significance of Thick Carbonate Grainstone Packages in Nonmarine Successions Barra Velha Formation 161 Figure 4. West east traverse see Figure 1 for location of line of section from full stack Kirchhoff PSDM zero phase, reverse polarity through well C showing the eastward thinning of the BVF on a tilted block. The attenuation of the BVF is associated with the deposition of thick packages of carbonate grainstone Lithofacies Association 5, Table 1 . See text for details. IAU Intra-Alagoas unconformity. Vertical exaggeration 3. minimum thickness 0.05 m maximum thickness 4.81 m n 65 sharp-based packages mostly s howing fining-upward trends Figure 6 . Coarsening- upward packages are much less common but do occur locally Figure 6A and are of a similar scale to the fining- upward ones. Although cycle bases are sharp, they are mainly planar with at most 1 or 2 cm of relief. Fining upward in some cycles is sufficient that the uppermost parts show packstone textures with wispy argillaceous laminae. Grain size is mainly medium to coarse grained but is locally up to granule to pebble size in the rudstone textures at the base of fining-upward packages Figures 6 8 . Grain size shows a relationship to structural setting with grainstones deposited on steeper escarpment slopes apparently being coarser than those on gentler dip slopes Figure 6 . In well C, for example, grain size is typically medium to coarse grained and rudstone textures are common Figure 6A , whereas in well A, grain size is typically fine to medium grained and rudstones are rare Figure 6B . By far the dominant form of stratification is planar to low-angle lamination Figures 6, 7A . Planar cross-bedding also occurs maximum cross-bed set height is 0.45 m as does cross-lamination Figures 6, 7B . Only a single occurrence of trough cross- bedding has been observed with set heights of 0.25 m. I rregular crinkly lamination locally occurs both at cycle tops and within cycles, in some cases showing a tufted morphology Figure 7D . Petrographic observations reveal that the laminae comprise micrite with porostromate-like structures in which the filament tubes are filled with calcite or silica cement Figure 9a, b . The grainstones comprise rounded to well-rounded and moderate to well-sorted fragments of shrubs, spherulites, recrystallized and heavily micritized carbonate grains of indeterminate origin showing variable rounding and grain size, very fineto medium-grained peloids, bone fragments, and, locally, ostracods and clasts of basalt Figure 8 . The degree of rounding and abrasion is such that the identification of shrub fragments is commonly only possible from their distinctive optical properties sweeping extinction with rare curved twin planes cleavage resembling both radiaxial fibrous calcite and fascicular 162 BARNETT ET AL. Figure 5. North to south well correlation through wells A D showing the abundance and stratigraphic distribution of grainstones. Continuous colored bars are intervals of whole core discontinuous colored bars are sidewall core samples. optic calcite cf., Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2020 in crossed polars. Coated grains locally occur both as superficial ooids and aggregate grains Figure 8D . Oncoids, however, are extremely rare, and only a single occurrence has been noted within a bed less than 5 cm in thickness. Coated grains are absent from cycle bases and appear to be restricted to the middle and upper parts of cycles where grain size is medium to coarse grained or finer. The coarser basal parts of fining-upward package show c entimeter-scale up to 8 cm in length angular to subangular, platy intraclasts Figure 9 composed of the following 1. Reworked incipient shrub laminae and fibrous calcite mats 2. Recrystallized carbonate showing neosparitic textures locally with some remnants of clotted peloidal textures 3. Silicified clasts with clearly truncated margins 4. Laminated clotted peloidal micrite Clast types 1 to 3 also occur as more rounded grains in the sand to pebble grade fraction of grainstones and rudstones. In addition to these commonly occurring centimeter-scale intraclasts, very rare probable blocks of originally in situ shrub framestones up to 0.4 m in thickness locally occur. An estimation of the width of these clasts is precluded by the limitation of borehole size. The grainstones commonly have well-developed interparticle porosity Figures 8C, 9F and are, in general, only poorly compacted with component grains exhibiting point and line contacts. Exceptions occur in samples with volcanic clasts, which are almost without exception heavily compacted with common concavo-convex grain contacts Figure 8F . P rimary interparticle porosity has in some samples been f urther enhanced by dissolution. Micritized grains are locally intensely leached to give intraparticle microporosity and or partially developed moldic p orosity Figure 8C . The main porosity-occluding phase is calcite spar and silica cement. Pore-filling dolomite cements occur but are less common. Measured core and sidewall core plug porosity is up to 18.6 but can be as low as 2.3 in heavily compacted and or cemented samples mean porosity 10.4 n 99 . Origin and Significance of Thick Carbonate Grainstone Packages in Nonmarine Successions Barra Velha Formation 163 Figure 6. Core description of grainstone-dominated successions in the BVF from A the steeper escarpment slope of the tilted fault block penetrated by well C and B the more gently dipping dip slope penetrated by well A. C CT image s howing the arrangement of grainstones into sharp-based, mainly fining-upward successions in well C. Cycle bases are marked by dashed lines. Each core stick is 0.9 m in length. 164 BARNETT ET AL. Figure 7. Core photographs from the BVF in wells A and C. A Planar lamination to low-angle lamination in medium-grained grainstone, well A. B Planar crossbedding Xb in fine-grained, well-sorted grainstone, well C. Planar lamination Pl is also visible in the upper part of the image. C Sharp, planar contact separating grainstone below from rudstone above at the base of a decimeter-scale finingupward succession, well C. Both carbonate Ca and silicified Si intraclasts are visible immediately above the contact. D Microbial mat arrowed within fine- to medium-grained grainstone, well C. Borehole image log interpretation allows the derivation of paleocurrent direction from the dip azimuth of certain sedimentary structures Figure 10 . This has been done at two different scales 1. The formation scale as revealed by the dip azimuth of oversteepened beds 2. The bedform scale as revealed by the dip azimuth of planar cross-bedding At the formation scale, oversteepened beds in well C show a predominantly unimodal radial dip azimuth pattern, normal to paleoslope vector mean 109 n 349 . The mean dip is 12.9 n 349 . The west southwesterly dipping fault escarpment p enetrated by well C has an approximate strike of 30 210 Figure 10A . Oversteepened beds in well A show a similar mainly unimodal radial dip azimuth p attern but with more scatter than well C. Dip a zimuth d irections are again normal to paleoslope vector mean 338 n 110 because the northwesterly dipping fault dip slope penetrated by well A has a strike of approximately 35 205 . The mean dip is 6.6 n 110 Figure 10C . At the smaller bedform scale, dip azimuths derived from planar cross-bedded grainstones in well C show a similar dip azimuth pattern to the oversteepened beds vector mean 98 n 52 Figure 10B . Origin and Significance of Thick Carbonate Grainstone Packages in Nonmarine Successions Barra Velha Formation 165 Figure 8. Thin-section photomicrographs from the BVF in wells A and C. A Grainstone showing typical grain assemblage of shrubs Sh , spherulites Sp , recrystallized calcitic clasts R , and peloids P . Pore-filling cement is poikilotopic silica Si . Plane polarized light, well A. B Crossed polars image of A showing distinctive extinction patterns in shrubs and s pherulites. C Grainstone with common clasts of recrystallized calcite R and a well-rounded bone fragment arrowed . Other grains include peloids P and indeterminate micritic clasts M with well-developed intraparticle microporosity as well as r eworked shrubs Sh and spherulites Sp . Well C, plane polarized light. D Grainstone with superficial ooids arrowed , micritized coated grains Co , and peloids P . Plane polarized light, well C. E Very fine to fine-grained grainstone. Note the high degree of grain rounding and sorting. Grain assemblage includes peloids and partially micritized spherulite and highly rounded shrub fragments suggesting that at least some of the peloids may be finely comminuted shrub and spherulite fragments, which have been heavily micritized. Plane polarized light, well A. F Coarse- to very coarse-grained grainstone with clast of basalt Ba . Note generally greater degree of compaction shown by penetrative grain contacts arrowed . Plane polarized light, well A. 166 BARNETT ET AL. Figure 9. Thin-section photomicrographs from the Barra Velha Formation in wells A and C. A Tufted microbial mat arrowed in well A. Pore-filling and partially replacive diagenetic phase is silica. Plane polarized light. B Higher magnification view of microbial mat in A showing porostromate structures. C Platy intraclasts arrowed in rudstone fabric at a fining-upward cycle base. Clast comprises reworked laminae of coalesced incipient shrubs. Well C, plane polarized light. D Crossed polar image of C . E Platy intraclast I in grainstone rudstone fabric at a fining-upward cycle base. In this example, the clast comprises clotted peloidal micrite. The pore-filling cement is calcite spar. The surrounding sand-size grains comprise rounded shrub fragments Sh , spherulites Sp , peloids P , and recrystallized calcitic clasts R . Well C, plane polarized light. F Very coarse-grained grainstone at cycle base in well A with well-developed solution-enhanced interparticle porosity note etched grain margins, arrowed and a reworked, rounded clast of silica Si . Although extremely abraded some carbonate clasts are still recognizable as shrubs Sh and spherulites Sp . Plane polarized light. Origin and Significance of Thick Carbonate Grainstone Packages in Nonmarine Successions Barra Velha Formation 167 Figure 10. Dip azimuth data derived from BHI log interpretation. The arrow is the vector mean for each data set the black dashed line is fault block strike. A Well C rose diagram showing dip azimuths from oversteepened and vuggy oversteepened bedding. Vector mean 109 N 349. B Well C rose diagram showing dip azimuths from planar cross-bedding. Vector mean 98 N 52. C Well A rose diagram showing dip azimuths from oversteepened and vuggy oversteepened bedding. Vector mean 338 N 110. D Well A rose diagram showing dip azimuths from planar crossbedding. Vector mean 162 N 54. Planar cross-bedding dip azimuths in well A show a different and more variable pattern, dominantly subparallel to the northeast-to-southwest striking dip slope vector mean 162 n 54 Figure 10D . Interpretation The progressive onlap, thinning, and change to demonstrably high-energy facies e.g., cross- bedded grainstones and rudstones with centimeter-scale intraclasts on the fault block crest indicate that this was a depositional paleo-high characterized by lower accommodation space and, as such, was at or near the local paleoshoreline of the BVF lake. The radial depositional dip azimuth pattern encountered on the escarpment slope in well C and the dip slope in well A indicate that the grainstone-dominated succession in both locations has a fan-like morphology and dips down paleoslope into any c ontemporaneous lake. The predominance of sharp-based, decimeter-scale fining-upward successions points to a progressive 168 BARNETT ET AL. decrease in wave and or current energy during deposition following an initial phase of erosion. The absence of any significant relief or dip on the basal erosion surfaces suggests that the flows responsible were not confined to channels. Episodic breaks in the deposition of detrital sediments is indicated by the colonization of the sediment surface by microbial mats as recorded by the presence of crinkly laminated micritic laminae with clotted peloidal and porostromate fabrics Lithofacies 4A, Table 1 . The presence of in situ shrub laminae within beds of grainstone and the local interbedding of other lacustrine facies Figures 5, 6B, Table 1 indicates that whatever the depositional environment of the grainstones, it was time equivalent to and intimately associated with the better documented shrub, spherulite, and calcimudstone-dominated lithofacies associations Table 1 . As noted earlier, the dominant form of stratification is planar to low-angle lamination. This preferentially occurs in the upper, finer grained parts of the fining-upward cycles in well C and the generally finer grained grainstones of well A. In sand-grade sediments that lack significant quantities of mica and are finer than ca. 600 m, flatbeds with parallel lamination indicate upper flow regime conditions Collinson and Mountney, 2019 . Many closed lakes in arid and semiarid climates are fringed by alluvial fans Talbot and Allen, 1996 Renaut and Gierlowski-Kordesch, 2010 . The earlier observations would be consistent with sheet floods upward-fining cycles, lack of evidence of channels, upper flow regime conditions on an alluvial fan radial paleocurrent patterns orientated down paleoslope sourced from an upland composed of previously deposited lacustrine carbonates. However, other lines of evidence are inconsistent with this interpretation, most notably the degree of rounding and sorting shown by the grainstones. Because of the episodic nature of sediment transport and the limited sediment transport distance typical of alluvial fans, the resulting deposits are commonly poorly sorted with variable grain rounding and sometimes a depositional silt- or clay-grade matrix. In contrast, one of the most striking characteristics of many of the grainstones described here is that they are remarkably well rounded and sorted with a high degree of grain sphericity. Furthermore, the scenario outlined earlier does not explain several features of the grainstones. First, the local presence of coated grains like superficial ooids testifies to prolonged, continuous grain movement, not the type of episodic transport characteristic of a flash flood. Coated grains lack truncated cements and are not fragmented, suggesting that they are formed in situ and were not reworked from preexisting limestones. Second, although paleocurrents from planar cross-bed sets in well C are consistent with radial down paleoslope flow on an alluvial fan Figure 10B , those in well A show a marked southerly trend, which would be oblique onshore to any downslope prograding fan at that location Figure 10D . Planar, lakeward-dipping lamination is typical of unidirectional backwash in foreshore environments and can also be caused by high-energy waves in the surf zone along both lacustrine and marine shorelines Reading and Collinson, 1996 Collinson and Mountney, 2019 . Such an interpretation would not only explain basinward depositional dips Figure 10 but would also provide the more continuous agitation required to explain the textural maturity of the grainstones and the local presence of coated grains. Furthermore, oblique, onshore paleocurrent patterns from planar cross-bedding can readily be explained by the wave-driven migration of sandwaves, whereas downslope sediment transport by debris flows and sheet floods cannot. The grainstones and rudstones described herein are therefore interpreted as high- energy, wave-dominated shoreline deposits derived from the disaggregation and reworking of mainly shrub and spherulite-dominated limestones. Prograding shoreline deposits in both siliciclastic Reading and Collinson, 1996 and carbonate environments Ward and Brady, 1979 Milroy and Wright, 2000 typically show coarsening-upward trends. The dominance of fining-upward trends in the BVF grainstones therefore requires some explanation. One possibility is that they represent transgressive shoreline deposits recording lake deepening and shoreline retreat. Indeed, the progressive onlap of the BVF shown in Figure 4 indicates an overall transgressive trend at the formation 102 m scale. However, even within this longer term transgression, one would expect higher frequency regressive events to produce smaller scale meter scale or thinner coarsening-upward packages, especially if the BVF lake was subject to frequent flooding- evaporation cycles Figure 3 . A nother possibility, therefore, is that the relative scarcity of coarsening- upward cycles is because of frequent cycle truncation by erosion prior to deposition of the following cycle. This is supported by the sharp bases of each of the cycles and the immediately overlying intraclast lag. Discussion The grainstones and rudstones documented in this chapter occur within successions greater than 160 m thick in which they make up well over 50 of the Origin and Significance of Thick Carbonate Grainstone Packages in Nonmarine Successions Barra Velha Formation 169 facies present. Individual and continuous packages of stacked grainstones up to 15.4 m thick are observed in the cored interval of well C, and if the sidewall core sampling in this well is representative, then continuous successions of grainstone may exceed 22 m Figure 5 . Furthermore, the grainstone-dominated facies belt extends ca. 40 km along strike Figure 1 . Consequently, grainstones of the type described earlier are, locally at least, a major component of the BVF depositional system and can form high-quality reservoirs. Some of the samples described in this chapter have porosity up to 19 . Nevertheless, they have received little attention in previous studies with most workers focusing on the in situ components of the BVF and similar, age-equivalent units, especially the shrubs and spherulites e.g., Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2020 Herlinger et al., 2017 Farias et al., 2019 Lima and De Ros, 2019 . Successions greater than 160 m thick, dominated by high-energy grainstone deposits, would be noteworthy in a marine basin cf., Burchette et al., 1990 . However, they are particularly unusual in a lacustrine basin where the relatively limited fetch would result in reduced wave energy compared to marine equivalents. This is especially true in low-gradient closed or endorheic lakes in which rapid and frequent lake level changes can prevent the establishment of stable shorelines Talbot and Allen, 1996 . Although the gradient of the BVF lake clearly varied through time because of both local faulting and the regional shift from rifting to thermal sag subsidence, many workers favor a closed lake depositional environment, especially for that part of the formation above the IAU Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2020 Pietzsch et al., 2018 Farias et al., 2019 . Consequently, the origin of thick stacked, high-energy grainstones in both footwall and hanging wall structural settings requires some explanation. In the preceding section, we concluded that the grainstones were produced by the reworking of mainly shrub and spherulite-dominated deposits along a high-energy shoreline. At the formation scale, depositional dips within grainstone-dominated successions show a radial, fan-like, and lakeward-dipping pattern in wells drilled on both the escarpment and dip slopes Figure 10A, C . The grainstone bodies therefore appear to have a lobate or fan-like morphology. However, a mechanism is required to generate and concentrate large amounts of carbonate sand and gravel at the shoreline to produce successions of the type and thickness described. Although waves are important in reworking, winnowing, and transporting sediment, they are unlikely to be an efficient mechanism for concentrating significant thicknesses of sand and gravel at one location because, as already noted, the fair weather wave base is likely to migrate laterally over considerable distances in response to rapid and frequent lake-level changes. All of the earlier observations can be reconciled in a fan delta environment. In this chapter we follow McPherson et al. 1987 in defining a fan delta as an ater. alluvial fan that builds into a standing body of w It follows from this definition and the observation that alluvial fans commonly occur along the margins of closed lakes in arid and semiarid climates that fan deltas are similarly common in such settings. The presence of water bodies marginal to fans can affect fan development in several ways. Of relevance in this case is the fact that fans can be significantly eroded by waves or longshore currents where they adjoin a water body and beach, shoreface or longshore drift deposits, such as spits, may develop. Where this is observed to occur, the resulting deposits show significantly greater textural maturity than upslope alluvial fan deposits that have not been subject to waves or longshore currents Horton and Schmitt, 1996 Blair and McPherson, 2008 . As such, a fan delta environment provides the necessary mechanism for the degree of sorting and rounding observed in the BVF grainstones as wells as the suite of observed sedimentary structures and the fanlike morphologies of the grainstone- dominated successions. Such a setting is also consistent with the cycle truncation proposed in the preceding section to explain the dominance of fining-upward over coarsening-upward packages. Repeated erosion and r eworking of shoreline deposits by flash floods would be expected in a fan-delta environment. Horton and Schmitt 1996 propose a similar mechanism to explain the apparent absence of progradational, coarsening-upward cycles in siliciclastic fan-delta shoreline facies. Furthermore, pronounced changes in water depth, as is typical in closed lakes, can cause significant fan erosion and reworking over a large range of elevation. For example, in Walker Lake, Nevada, the position of wave reworking fluctuated over a vertical range of 157 m during the past 18 kyr producing complex interfingering of subaerial and lake shoreline facies across a 1700 m radial belt. In other words, a fan delta provides a mechanism for both the disaggregation and concentration of thick accumulations of sediment by subaerial erosion and downslope sediment transport as well as the intense winnowing of that sediment by waves on the distal nearshore part of the fan. A possibly analogous environment is observed at Winnemucca Lake in Nevada where the subaerial exposure and subsequent erosion of spring mounds that developed in a sublacustrine environment between 13 Ka and 26 Ka have led to the development 170 BARNETT ET AL. of prominent carbonate beach ridges Benson, 2004 T. C. Blair, 2019, personal communication Figure 11 . The resulting beach gravels are mainly composed of fragment shrub and thinolite, the dominant components of the spring mounds, together with clasts of Miocene basalt Figure 11 . Although not an active fan delta, the gravels at Winnemucca Lake have some partial analogies with the interpretation presented here for the BVF grainstones They are the products of point sourcing from spring mounds , subaerial disaggregation, downslope sediment transport from older carbonates, and the redistribution and winnowing of this material by waves at a lake shoreline with well-developed beach ridges and spits. The high degree of textural maturity of some of the grainstone samples was highlighted in the p receding section see, for example, Figure 8A, E, F . In fact, the authors have rarely seen such uniformly d eveloped rounding and sphericity except in carbonate eolianites e.g., Dodd et al., 1993 Barnett, 2002 . Dodd et al. 1993 Figure 11. A Aerial photograph of part of Winnemucca Lake showing the carbonate spring mound at Needle Rock and t opographically higher older spring mounds. The surrounding beach ridges have been derived from the erosion of the spring mounds. Image from Google Earth. B View northward from Needle Rock showing prominent beach ridges arrowed in A . C View southeastward from beach ridges to Needle Rock. Person arrowed for scale. D Beach gravels composed of shrub Sh and thinolite Th fragments derived from spring mounds as well as Miocene igneous rocks Ba . Origin and Significance of Thick Carbonate Grainstone Packages in Nonmarine Successions Barra Velha Formation 171 claimed that strong abrasion during eolian transport greatly increases the roundness and sphericity of grains that were originally tabular because the low viscosity of air relative to water induces increased grain breakage and abrasion. The current spherical morphology of grains that were originally elongated such as shrubs or bone fragments could be because of intense grain breakage and abrasion in an eolian environment prior to deposition. The relatively long periods between major depositional episodes on the subaerial parts of fans or beach ridges make surficial sediment modification by secondary processes like wind commonplace. In more extreme cases, eolian sandsheets can form thick and laterally continuous blankets that disrupt or even terminate fan deposition Blair and McPherson, 2009 . Note that it is not being suggested that the grainstones described in this chapter are eolianites. Clear examples of inversely graded laminae produced by the migration and climb of wind ripples climbing translatent stratification , the most definitive criterion for recognizing eolianites regardless of original mineralogy Hunter, 1977 Loope and Abegg, 2001 , are not common. Conversely, Kindler and Davaud 2001 observe that wind ripple strata are sometimes rare in carbonate eolianites that lack detrital quartz. However, adhesion ripples are also apparently absent, and grains larger than ca. 4 mm are common in rudstone fabrics at c ycle bases. Both characteristics are inconsistent with an eolian depositional environment. The idea that is being considered earlier is simply that the grain assemblage that now makes up the thick BVF grainstones was subject to eolian transport and resulting grain abrasion prior to deposition at the lake shoreline. The apparent paucity of widespread paleosols in the BVF and equivalent units in the Campos Basin is surprising Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2020 Herlinger et al., 2017 Farias et al., 2019 Lima and De Ros, 2019 , although the presence of paleokarst in BVF successions with locally occurring, seismically resolvable mounds has been suggested by Barnett et al. 2018 . Very little is known of the time periods required for the formation of calcimagnesian soils, that is, soils developed on carbonate substrates Duchaufour, 1982 Wright, 1994 . However, because of the abundant supply of carbonate, it is likely that they form much more abruptly than those that develop on siliciclastic substrates such as the well-dated calcretes of the southwest U.S.A. Machette, 1985 , which can require 10 5 years to reach stage 4 Wright, 1994 . The above observation makes the lack of clear, well-developed pedogenic features in the BVF even more unusual. One possible explanation is the prevailing paleoclimate during BVF deposition. Although a soil moisture deficit is necessary to allow carbonate to accumulate and not to be flushed out of an incipient soil profile, calcimagnesian soils do not form in very arid settings because there is not enough water passing through the soil to dissolve sufficient quantities of carbonate. Furthermore, the role of organic processes is critical because much of the available carbonate is probably precipitated through biological activity. Extreme aridity would suppress vegetation, which, in addition, would also retard other pedogenic processes such as brecciation, much of which is thought to be caused by plant roots Wright, 1994 . One other explanation for the scarcity of paleosols is that the grainstones described herein are not shallow-water deposits but were generated by deeper water currents cf., Eberli et al., 2019 . However, this is inconsistent with several features of the grainstones. First, as already noted, their structural and stratigraphic context suggests a shallower setting as they occur where a thinning of the BVF is observed in association with a change in facies to grain- supported detrital rocks with rounded to well-rounded grains and cross-stratification. Second, instead of being interbedded with profundal lake deposits, as would be expected in a deeper lake setting, the grainstones form decameter-thick stacked packages lacking intercalations of such facies. Where interbeds of other facies do occur, they mainly comprise limited developments of the shrub, spherulite, and calcimudstone c ycles described in Figure 3 and Table 1, which become progressively better developed downdip Figure 12 . All published work on the BVF to date suggest that the shrubs and spherulites represent relatively shallow, closed lake deposits based on the following 1. The near absence of sand-size siliciclastic sediment reflecting riverine input 2. A low-diversity nonmarine ostracod fauna, which becomes increasingly restricted up-section in the BVF Pietzsch et al., 2018 3. Carbon and oxygen stable isotopes that either show covariant trends Wright and Barnett, 2017 Barnett et al., 2018 or, in the absence of covariance, limited variation in 13C but a wide range in 18O values Pietzsch et al., 2020 Although the earlier criteria are strong evidence that the BVF lakes were hydrologically closed and therefore probably tending to be relatively shallow, caution is needed in trying to assign precise water depths. The covariant trends in carbon and oxygen and stable isotopes documented by Talbot 1990 , for example, come from modern closed lakes, and although the fact of hydrologic closure is beyond doubt, the maximum water depth of these lakes ranges from 3 m to greater than 400 m. Nevertheless, it is clear 172 BARNETT ET AL. Figure 12. Schematic model for grainstone deposition on a tilted fault block showing the association with basinward lacustrine facies. Model is shown at the scale of two meter-scale cycles see Figure 3 . A Grainstone rudstone lithofacies are restricted to updip locations and the shrub lithofacies association progressively thins downdip so that the BVF in downdip settings is dominated by the spherulite and calcimudstone lithofacies associations. B Inboard of A the shrub lithofacies association becomes thicker and more developed producing cycles like those described by Wright and Barnett 2015 . C In progressively more updip locations, cycles are locally capped by sharp-based thin beds of the grainstone rudstone facies association, which represent the feather edge of the more extensive belt of detrital carbonates described in this chapter. D On both the dip slope and escarpment slope of the fault block, crest stacked decimeter-to-meter scale packages of grainstones occur with relatively thin intercalations of other BVF lithofacies. that the grainstones do not pass downdip into typical profundal lake deposits e.g., thick successions of laminated calcimudstones as would be expected if they were generated by deep-water currents. Consequently, it may be, based on the earlier discussion, that the only widespread, albeit indirect evidence of subaerial exposure in the BVF is the presence of grainstones of the type described here in as much as they may record the subaerial disaggregation of previously deposited BVF limestones. Regardless, the identification and mapping of shoreline deposits is critical to the interpretation of the BVF because it lacks many of the typical indicators of water depth that geoscientists are accustomed to working with. This is especially important given the ongoing debate about the paleobathymetry of the BVF lake. If the interpretation presented in this chapter is correct, then the grainstones provide an important reference point for the understanding of the more commonly occurring BVF facies. A schematic model illustrating the relationship between the grainstones and the other facies that make up the BVF is presented in Figure 12. CONCLUSIONS Much of the debate as to the origin of the unusual BVF carbonates has been fueled by the paucity of many of the sedimentological features that geoscientists normally use to interpret sedimentary rocks. The presence of the thick and extensive belt of high-energy, shallow-water deposits documented in this chapter therefore provides an essential datum or reference point to constrain the interpretation of the more commonly occurring and also more enigmatic facies that make up the BVF and equivalent stratigraphic units in neighboring basins. Given the good reservoir quality of the grainstone facies and their preferential occurrence in seismically mappable tectono-stratigraphic settings, they also represent a potential exploration target on other pre-salt structures. To date, lacustrine carbonate shoreline deposits have received relatively little study and, as with so many other aspects of the pre-salt carbonates of the Santos Basin, the deposits described here demonstrate the need, both from an academic and economic point of view, for further research. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors would like to express their gratitude to Imelda Johnson, Barry Katz, and Cody Miller for their constructive and helpful reviews. We would also like to thank partner companies Petrobras and GALP for the permission to publish. Andrew J. Barnett thanks Paul Wright, Terence Blair, John Grotzinger, and Bruce Levell for numerous helpful discussions and Ann Origin and Significance of Thick Carbonate Grainstone Packages in Nonmarine Successions Barra Velha Formation 173 Murray and Deborah Walker BHI and Core Specialists for their invaluable help with BHI processing and interpretation. AJB would also like to express his appreciation to past and present colleagues at British Gas and Shell for many stimulating discussions on the BVF over the past 10 years. This chapter is dedicated to the memory of my good friend, Paul Milroy, who tragically passed away on May 26, 2018, while engaged in fieldwork on T riassic lacustrine rocks in southwest England. REFERENCES CITED Alabaster, J. S., and R. S. Lloyd, 1980, Water quality criteria for freshwater fish London, Butterworths, 345 p. Barnett, A. J., 2002, An investigation of the controls on stratigraphic cyclicity in late Mississippian-early Pennsylvanian Carboniferous platform carbonates. PhD thesis, Cardiff University, 246 p. Barnett, A. J., M. Obermaier, J. Amthor, K. Juk, R. Camara, M. Sharafodin, and M. Bolton, 2018, Origin and significance of thick carbonate grainstone packages in non-marine successions A case study from the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin AAPG Search and Discovery Article 11116, AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition, Salt Lake City, Utah, May 20 23, accessed December 21, 2020, http www.searchanddiscovery.com abstracts html 2018 ace2018 abstracts 2855000.html. Benson, L., 2004, The Tufas of Pyramid Lake, Nevada U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1267, 14 p. Blair, T. C., and J. C. McPherson, 2008, Quaternary sedimentology of the Rose Creek fan delta, Walker Lake, Nevada, USA, and implications to fan-delta facies models Sedimentology, v. 55, p. 579 615. Blair, T. C., and J. G. McPherson, 2009, Processes and forms of alluvial fans, in A. J. Parsons and A. D. Abrahams, eds., Geomorphology of desert environments Elsevier B.V. Springer, Chapter 14, p. 354 402, DOI 10.1007 9781-4020-5719-9J. Burchette, T. P., V. P. Wright, T. J. Faulkner, 1990, Oolitic sandbody depositional models and geometries, Mississippian of southwest Britain Implications for petroleum explora eology, tion in carbonate ramp settings Sedimentary G v. 68, p. 87 115. Burne, R. V., and L. Moore, 1987, Microbialites Organosedimentary deposits of benthic microbial communities Palaios, v. 2, p. 241 254. Collinson, J. D., and N. P. Mountney, 2019, Sedimentary structures Edinburgh-London, Dunedin, 340 p. Davison, I., L. Anderson, and P. Nuttall, 2012, Salt deposition, loading and gravity drainage in the Campos and Santos salt basins, in G. I. Alsop, S. G. Archer, A. J. Hartley, N. T. Grant, and R. Hodgkinson, eds., Salt tectonics, sediments and prospectivity Geological Society of London Special Publication 363, p. 159 173. Dodd, J. R., C. W. Zuppann, C. D. Harris, K. W. Leonard, and T. W. Brown, 1993, Petrologic method for distinguishing eolian and marine grainstones, Ste. Genevieve Limestone Mississippian of Indiana, in B. D. Keith and C. W. Zuppann, eds., Mississippian oolites and modern analogs AAPG Studies in Geology 35, p. 49 60. Duchaufour, P., 1982, Pedology, pedogenesis and classification London, Allen and Unwin, 448 p. Eberli, G., E. Suosaari, E. Karaca, M. Diaz, C. Betzler, T. L u dmann, 2019, Lessons from Hamelin Pool and the M aldives for the coquina reservoirs in Libra, Santos Basin AAPG Search and Discovery Article 90350, AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition, Houston, Texas, May 19 22, accessed December 21, 2020, http www . s earchanddiscovery.com abstracts html 2019 ace2019 abstracts 2168.html. Farias, F., P. Szatmari, A. Bahniuk, and A. B. Franc a, 2019, Evaporitic carbonates in the pre-salt of Santos Basin genesis and tectonic implications Marine and Petroleum Geology, v. 105, p. 251 272. Herlinger Jr., R., E. E. Zambonato, and L. F. De Ros, 2017, Influence of diagenesis on the quality of lower cretaceous pre-salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs from northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil Journal of Sedimentary Research, v. 87, p. 1285 1313. Horton, B. K., and J. G. Schmitt, 1996, S edimentology of a lacustrine fan-delta system, Miocene Horse Camp F ormation, Nevada, USA Sedimentology, v. 43, p. 133 155. Hunter, R. E., 1977, Basic types of stratification in small eolian dunes Sedimentology, v. 24, p. 361 387. Jones, B. F., 1986, Clay mineral diagenesis in lacustrine settings, in F. A. Mumpton, ed., Studies in diagenesis U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 1578, p. 291 300. Khoury, H. N., D. D. Eberl, B. F. Jones, 1982, Origin of magnesium clays from the Armargosa Desert, Nevada Clays and Clay Minerals, v. 30, p. 327 336. Kindler, P., and E. Davaud, 2001, Recognizing eolianites in thin section Review and case study The Lower Cretaceous Chambotte Formation, Sale ve Chain, southeastern France, in F. E. Abegg, P. M. Harris, and D. B., Loope, eds., Modern and ancient carbonate eolianites Sedimentology, sequence stratigraphy, and diagenesis SEPM Special Publication 71, p. 141 150. Lima, B. E. M., and L. F. De Ros, 2019, Deposition, diagenetic and hydrothermal processes in the Aptian pre-salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs of the northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil Sedimentary Geology, v. 383, p. 55 81. Loope, D. B., and F. E. Abegg, 2001, Recognition of geologic preservation of ancient carbonate eolianites, in F. E. Abegg, P. M. Harris, and D. B., Loope, eds., Modern and ancient carbonate eolianites Sedimentology, sequence stratigraphy, and diagenesis SEPM Special Publication 71, p. 3 16 Machette, M. N., 1985, Calcic soils of the south-western United States Geological Society of America Special Paper 203, p. 1 21. McPherson, J. G., G. Shanmugam, and R. J. Moiola, 1987, Fan-deltas and braid deltas Varieties of coarse-grained delta Geological Society of America Bulletin, v. 99, p. 331 340. 174 BARNETT ET AL. Milroy, P. G., and V. P. Wright, 2000, A highstand oolitic sequence and associated facies from a Late Triassic lake basin, south west England Sedimentology, v. 47, p. 187 209. Moreira, J. L. P., C. V. Madeira, J. A. Gil, and M. A. P. Machado, 2007, Bacia de Santos Boletin Geociencias Petrobras, v. 15, p. 531 549. Pietzsch, R., D. M. Oliveira, L. R. Tedeschi, J. Neto, M. F. Figueredo, J. C, Vasquez and R. S. de Souza, 2018, Palaeohydrology of the Lower Cretaceous pre-salt lacustrine system, from rift to post-rift phase, Santos Basin, Brazil Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, v. 507, p. 60 80. Pietzsch, R., L. R. Tedeschi, D. M. Oliveira, C. W. D dos Anjos, J. C. Vasquez, and M. F. Figueredo, 2020, Environmental conditions of deposition of the Lower Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin Brazil , based on stable carbonate and oxygen isotopes A continental record of pCO2 during the onset of the Oceanic Anoxic Event OAE 1a interval Chemical Geology, v. 535, p. 1 23. Reading, H. G., and J. D. Collinson, 1996, Clastic coasts, in H. G. Reading, ed., Sedimentary environments Processes, Facies and Stratigraphy Oxford, Blackwell Science, p. 154 231. Renaut, R. W., and E. H. Gierlowski-Kordesch, 2010, Lakes, in N. P. James, and R. W. Dalrymple, eds., Facies models 4 Geological Association of Canada GeoText 6, p. 541 576. Sabato Ceraldi, T., and D. Green, 2017, Evolution of the South Atlantic lacustrine deposits in response to Early Cretaceous rifting, subsidence and lake hydrology, in T. Sabato Ceraldi, R. A Hodgkinson, and G. Backe, eds., Petroleum geoscience of the West Africa margin Geological Society of London Special Publication 438, p. 77 98. Saller, A. H., S. Rushton, L. Buambua, K. Inman, R. McNeil, and J. A. D. Dickson, 2016, Presalt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola AAPG Bulletin, v. 100, p. 1135 1164. Talbot, M. R., 1990, A review of the palaeohydrological interpretation of carbon and oxygen isotopic ratios in primary lacustrine carbonates Chemical Geology, v. 80, p. 261 279. Talbot, M. R., and P. A. Allen, 1996, Lakes, in H. G. Reading, ed., Sedimentary environments Processes, Facies and Stratigraphy Oxford, Blackwell Science, p. 83 124. Tanaka, A. P., D. Faria, J. P. Gomes, O. de Souza Jr., 2018, Geological Characterization and Modeling of an Aptian Carbonate Reservoir in the Santos Basin, Brazil AAPG Search and Discovery Article 11128, accessed December 21, 2020, http www.searchanddiscovery.com pdfz documents 2018 11128tanaka ndx tanaka.pdf.html. Tedeschi, L. R., H. C. Jenkyns, S. A. Robinson, A. E. S. Sanjines, M. C. Viviers, C. M. S. P. Quintaes, and J. C. Vasquez, 2017, New age constraints on Aptian evaporites and carbonates from South Atlantic Implications for Oceanic Anoxic Event 1a Geology, v. 45, p. 543 546. Terra, G. J. S., A. R. Spadini, E. Zambonato, L. Costa da Silva Juschaks, L. M. Arienti, M. Erthal, M. Blauth, M. P. Franco, N. S. Matsuda, N. Goulart Carramal da Silva, P. Moretti, R. Davila, R. Schiffer de Souza, S. Tonietto, S. M. C. Anjos, V. Campinho, and W. Winter, 2010, Classificacao de rochas carbonaticas aplicavel a s bacias sedimentares Boletin Geociencias Petrobras, v. 18, p. 9 29. Tosca, N.J., and V. P. Wright, 2015, Diagenetic pathways linked to labile Mg-clays in lacustrine carbonate reservoirs A model for the origin of secondary porosity in the Cretaceous pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, offshore Brazil, in P. J. Armitage, A. R. Butcher, J. M. Churchill, A. E. Csoma, C. Hollis, R. H. Lander, J. E. Omma, and R. H. Worden, eds., Reservoir quality of clastic and carbonate rocks ociety of Analysis, modelling and prediction Geological S London Special Publication 435, p. 33 46. Tutolo, B., and N. J. Tosca, 2018, Experimental examination of Mg-silicate carbonate system at ambient temperature Implications for alkaline chemical sedimentation and l acustrine carbonate formation Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, v. 225, p. 80 101. Ward, W. C., and M. J. Brady, 1979, Strandline sedimentation of carbonate grainstones, Upper Pleistocene, Yucatan Peninsula, Mexico AAPG Bulletin, v. 63, p. 362 369. Wilson, M. J., 2013, Sheet silicates Rock forming minerals, volume 3C, sheet silicates, clay minerals Geological Society of London, 2nd edition, Volume 3C, 736 p. Winter, R. W., R. J. Jahnert, and A. B. Franca, 2007, Bacia de Campos Boletin Geociencias Petrobras, v. 15, p. 511 529. Wright, V. P., 1992, A revised classification of limestones Sedimentary Geology, v. 76, p. 177 185. Wright, V. P., 1994, Paleosols in shallow marine carbonate sequences Earth Science Reviews, v. 35, p. 367 395. Wright, V. P., and A. J. Barnett, 2015, An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic Early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates, in D. W. J. Bosence, K. A. Gibbons, D. P. Le Heron, W. A. Morgan, T. Pritchard, B. A. Vining, eds., Microbial carbonates in space and time Implications for global exploration and production L ondon, Geological Society, v. 418, p. 209 219. Wright, V. P., and A. J. Barnett, 2017, Critically evaluating the current depositional models for the pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, offshore Brazil AAPG Search and Discovery Article 51439, AAPG International Convention and Exhibition, London, England, October 15 18, 2018. Wright, V. P., and A. J. Barnett, 2020, The textural evolution and ghost matrices of the Cretaceous Barra Velha Formation carbonates from the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil Facies, v. 66, p. 14 32.

[END_OF_PAPER]

Critically Evaluating the Current Depositional Models for the Pre-Salt Barra Velha Formation, Offshore Brazil V. Paul Wright1 and Andrew Barnett2 Search and Discovery Article 51439 2017 Posted November 20, 2017 Adapted from Keynote Address given at AAPG SEG International Conference and Exhibition, London, England, October 15-18, 2017 Datapages 2017. Serial rights given by author. For all other rights contact author directly. 1 PW Carbonate Geoscience, Cardiff, UK vpw pwcarbonategeoscience.com Shell, Canary Warf, London, UK 2 Abstract This presentation assesses approaches for evaluating the two contrasting models for the depositional settings for the Cretaceous Barra Velha Formation carbonate reservoirs of Santos Basin, and their impact upon exploration strategies and reservoir modelling. One model invokes deeper lakes with differentiated microbial platforms having relief of hundreds of metres, as well as smaller buildups. The other model is of very shallow, evaporitic, hyper-alkaline lakes with predominantly abiotic carbonate and Mg-silicate precipitates. The case for the former has been based on the perceived presence of shelf-like margins resembling marine carbonate platforms, whereas the latter is based on detailed sedimentological analysis from a large data set supported by geochemical modelling. The hydrology of the Barra Velha lakes can be assessed by proxy using carbon and oxygen stable isotopes, by comparison with extensive studies from Quaternary lake deposits from East Africa. Co-variant trends in these Barra Velha isotopes suggest the former presence of shallow, evaporitic lakes which were likely very extensive or sourced from a uniform aquifer. Identifying isolated carbonate buildups is now facilitated by scoring using work flows, but this approach relates to marine systems and may not be appropriate for nonmarine ones as the absence of modern or ancient large scale, nonmarine buildups limits this approach. Instead the evidence shows that the large platform-like features are largely post-Barra Velha and structural in origin affected by varying degrees of subaerial erosion denudation . While available sedimentological and geochemical evidence does not support the presence of platform-like features with hundreds of metres of relief, this does not preclude the presence of large carbonate mounds and ridges analogous to those seen in modern extensional systems. However, as such features can be sub-lacustrine, subaerial or periodically both, their presence and interpreted relief cannot be used to draw reliable conclusions about palaeobathymetry Facies and well logs allow correlations to be made in the Barra Velha Formation from what appear to have been lows lake floor to highs platform within the basin, as defined beneath the base salt. This implies that these apparent topographic differences of hundreds of metres or more were not being reflected in any lithological differences at the time of deposition. This suggests that what appear to be paleotopographic differences are due to later structuration, post-deposition of the lake sediments, and prior to salt deposition. References Cited Bohacs K.M., et al., 2000, Lake-basin type, source potential, and hydrocarbon character An integrated sequence stratigraphic-geochemical framework in E.H. Gierlowski-Kordesch and K.R. Kelts, editors, Lake Basins through Space and Time AAPG Studies in Geology no. 46, p. 3-34. Buckley, J.P., et al., 2013, Carbonate buildups in the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil, in Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production Geological Society, London, Conference, 19-20 June 2013, p. 36-37. Buckley, J. P. et al., 2015, Tectonic setting and stratigraphic architecture of an Early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonate platform, Sugar Loaf High, Santos Basin, Brazil in D.W.J. Bosence et al., editors, Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production Geological Society, London, Special Publications no. 418, p. 175-191. Website accessed November 14, 2017, http dx.doi.org 10.1144 SP418.13 subscription required . Carroll, A.R., and K.M. Bohacs. 1999, Stratigraphic classification of ancient lakes balancing tectonic and climatic controls Geology, v. 27, p. 99-102. Della-Porta, G. 2015, Carbonate build-ups in lacustrine, hydrothermal and fluvial settings comparing depositional geometry, fabric types and geochemical signature, in D.W.J. Bosence et al. eds , Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. Geological Society, London, Special Publications no. 418, p. 17-68. Website accessed November 14, 2017, http dx.doi.org 10.1144 SP418.4 subscription required . der Mann, J., and J.W.D Rigg, 2012, New geological insights into the Santos Basin Geo ExPro February, 2012, p. 38-40. Goldberg, K., et al., 2017, Re-sedimented deposits in the rift section of the Campos Basin Marine and Petroleum Geology, v. 80, p. 412-431. Website accessed November 14, 2017, doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2016.11.022 subscription required . Hasiuk F.J., and S.E. Kaczmarek, 2015, Geochemical evidence of biotic influence in Brazilian pre-salt carbonates AAPG Search and Discovery Article 51190 2015 . Website accessed November 14, 2017, http www.searchanddiscovery.com documents 2015 51190hasiuk ndx hasiuk.pdf. Kattah, S., 2017, Exploration opportunities in the pre-salt play, deepwater Campos Basin, Brazil The Sedimentary record, v. 15 1, p. 4-8. Website accessed November 14, 20017, https www.sepm.org CM Files SedimentaryRecord SedRecord15-1-Final-lo.pdf. Playton, T.E., et al., 2010, Carbonate slopes, in N.P. James and R.W. Dalrymple, editors, Facies Models 4 Geological Association of Canada, p. 449-476. Poros, Z., et al., 2017, Origin of silica in pre-salt carbonates, Kwanza Basin, Angola Search and Discovery Article 51413 2017 . Website accessed November 14, 2017, http www.searchanddiscovery.com documents 2017 51413poros ndx poros.pdf. Sabato Ceraldi, T., and D. Green, 2017, Evolution of the South Atlantic lacustrine deposits in response to Early Cretaceous rifting, subsidence and lake hydrology, in T. Sabato Ceraldi et al., editors, Petroleum Geoscience of the West Africa Margin Geological Society, London, Special Publications, no. 438, p. 77-98. Website accessed November 14, 2017, http doi.org 10.1144 SP438.10 subscription required . Saller, A., et al., 2016, Pre-salt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola. AAPG Bulletin, v. 100 7, p. 11351164. Terra, G.J.S., A.R. Spadini, A.B. Franca, C.L. Sombra, E.E. Zambonato, L.C.da S. Juschaks, L.M. Arienti, and M.M. Erthal, 2010, Carbonate rock classification for Brazilian sedimentary basins Boletim de Geociencias da Petrobras, v. 18 1, p. 9-29. Williams, H.D., et al., 2011, Investigating carbonate platform types Multiple controls and a continuum of geometries Journal of Sedimentary Research, v. 81, p. 18-37. Wright, V.P., and A.J. Barnett, 2015, An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic Early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates, in D.W.J. Bosence et al., editors, Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production Geological Society, London, Special Publications no. 418, p. 209-219. Website accessed November 14, 2017, http dx.doi.org 10.1144 SP418.3 subscription required . Wright, V.P., and N.J. Tosca, 2016, A. Geochemical Model for the Formation of the Pre-Salt Reservoirs, Santos Basin, Brazil Implications for Understanding Reservoir Distribution Search and Discovery Article 51304 2016 . Website accessed November 14, 2017, http www.searchanddiscovery.com documents 2016 51304wright ndx wright.pdf. Critically evaluating the current depositional models for the Pre-Salt Barra Velha Fm, offshore Brazil V Paul Wright1, Andrew J Barnett2 1. PW Carbonate Geoscience, Cardiff, United Kingdom. 2. Shell, London, United Kingdom PWCG Photo courtesy of Adam Hiscock, Utah Geological Survey The problem The Pre-Salt Barra Velha Fm BV so-called Microbialites , Santos Basin hosts giant oil and gas fields and two conflicting models exist for its depositional setting with huge implications for exploration and production deeper lake, 100 s m deep with microbial platforms and isolated microbial buildups shallow evaporitic lake What is known is that the Barra Velha is closely associated with volcanics and formed in a rift setting affected by synand post-depositional faulting. differentiated microbial platforms deep 300m lake Linear ridges and cone-like buildups Take-away points For Santos Basin the weight of evidence suggests the main reservoir interval, the Barra Velha Formation did not develop as high-relief carbonate platforms Relief on the base salt was largely structural and post-Barra Velha in origin, not due to high relief platforms and deep lake basins during Barra Velha deposition As regards the isolated ridge-like and conical mounds, the main origins of such topography in closed rift basins are likely to be spring mounds and volcanoes Syn- and post-Barra Velha faulting, erosion and volcanism created features, such as clinoforms, more likely representing rotated onlap geometries, lava deltas and alluvial fans and fan deltas, but mis-interpreted as related to high-relief buildups The evidence comes from Re-evaluation of seismic data Long-range correlations Facies interpretations Isotopic data Many studies have identified carbonate platforms and isolated buildups Kattah, S. 2017. Exploration Opportunities in the Pre-Salt Play, Deepwater Campos Basin, Brazil. The Sedimentary record, 15,1, March 2017, p.4-8 doi 10.21110 sedred.2017.1 Deeper Lake Microbial Platform-Buildup Model The evidence for larger platforms comes from seismic interpretations showing relief on the base of the salt and on the presence of clinoforms For Santos Basin no evidence has been provided for differentiated platform-like buildups, or for the potential for the carbonate factories seen in the BV to produce such buildups The clinoforms suggest progradation but closed lakes in rift basins are dominated by aggradational strata generated mainly by evaporation. Progradation of the type that might produce clinoforms is limited to lake-margin alluvial fans or fan deltas, but morphologically similar features could be produced by, for example, lava deltas which are known in the Santos Basin. The isolated conical-ridge-like features seen on seismic could be sub-lacustrine vent spring-related, subaerial travertine cones or volcanoes seismic-scale sub-lacustrine buildup formation in lakes requires significant water depth The case for a shallow, as against a deep lake with high relief platforms, is based on 4 lines of evidence 1. Most seismic features attributable to carbonate buildups do not meet the standard criteria, and in most cases the features can be explained by synand especially post-Barra Velha faulting, including local inversion, and erosion, rotated onlap geometries and may even be volcanic in origin including lava deltas 2. Long-range correlations using well logs indicate that current relief across the basin did not exist at the time of deposition and is due to post-Barra Velha structuration 3. The facies model, supported by geochemical modelling, suggests shallow evaporitic lakes 4. Provisional isotopic data suggest the lakes were shallow and evaporitic, with no large water body nearby Evidence for the Platforms model Isolated mounds Could be sub-lacustrine buildups Could be subaerial travertine buildups Could be volcanoes From d.er Mann, J Rigg, J W D. 2012 New Geological Insights Into the Santos Basin, Geo ExPro February 2012. p.38-40 Clinoforms Could be subaqueous carbonate aprons Could be artefacts or even rotated onlap features Could be subaerial fans, lava deltas Buckley, J. P. et al. 2013 Carbonate Buildups in the Santos Basin, Offshore Brazil In Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. Geological Soc. Lon. Conference 19-20 June 2013, p36-37 Buckley, J. P. et al. 2015 Geol Soc London, Spec Publ. 418, 175-191 Isolated mound-like buildups have been proposed from Kwanza Basin very closely associated with faults Kwanza Cameia Saller A. et al. 2016. Pre-salt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola. AAPG Bulletin, v. 100, no. 7, pp. 1135 1164 Poros et al. 2017 for Omosi-1 well identify Poros, Z. et al. 2017, Origin of Silica in Pre-Salt Carbonates, Kwanza Basin, Angola, AAPG ACE Houston Abstract 2612742 courtesy of ConocoPhillips What is not clear is whether or not the large platforms are actually carbonate accumulations, as in many Phanerozoic marine platforms, or are simply carbonates that accumulated on antecedent topography. In the case of the former modelling, studies have shown what key parameters affect the geometry of marine carbonate platforms. Forward modelling 2D using large numbers of multi-parameter runs to define parameter space distributions of typical platform geometries Diffusion transport rate The key characteristic of these high relief systems is low-sediment diffusion and is linked to the sediment producers being less transportable large metazoans or metaphytes or microbial boundstones Amplitude of relative base-level change Production rate linked to depth profile Williams H D et al. 2011 Journal of Sedimentary Research, 81, 18-37. So do the Barra Velha sediments have high or low transportability Only two key components Mm-cm sized shrubs So are the Barra Velha sediments have high or low transportability Mm-sized spherulites Both components are frequently reworked, layered units, not massive, or reefal Franco well Source ANP Pre-Salt Libra Geological Assessment 17 9 2013 From Dorobek S et al. 2012 AAPG Hedberg conference Microbial carbonate reservoir characterization June 4-8, 2012 Houston Microbial factories ARE capable of building platforms and isolated buildups with hundreds of metres of relief and the Formation is also known as the Microbialites Carboniferous of N Spain and Kazakhstan Triassic of Dolomites Jurassic of Morocco Albian of N Spain etc... From Playton T E et al 2010 Carbonate Slopes- in Facies Model 4 ed by N P James R W Dalrymple , p.449-476 BUT in the Barra Velha microbial macrostructures which resemble classical stromatolites are rare 0.5 of thickness of logged sections as are microbial planar laminites 1 and oncoids 0.1 Within the key textural components such as shrubs microbial microstructures are very rare with as few as 0.05 to 0.1 of shrubs showing features such as microbial filament moulds In addition No modern lacustrine carbonate systems produce large differentiated platforms and seismic-scale clinoforms No analogues are currently known from the geological record of lakes There are examples of isolated, sub-lacustrine and subaerial mounds, the former at least of seismic-scale Pyramid Lake, Nevada 1-3km long 105m high Large sub-lacustrine spring mounds develop in perennial lakes they need the space depth in which to grow fault-controlled, fresh to alkaline, thermal springs, basalt terrain 15 What about subaerial mounds spring mounds and travertines Individual mounds today seem to reach a maximum height of 30m But can occur in complexes covering 100 s km2 and 250m thick But are subject to erosion Main travertine facies e.g., ridge-terrace association These produce distinctive facies associations not recorded in the bulk of the Barra Velha and C O isotopic data shows non-thermal signatures Della-Porta, G. 2015. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 418,17-68. http dx.doi.org 10.1144 SP418.4 Plant stems Shrubs bacterial and crystal formed on terraces Large crystal fans Coated grains , pisoids, coated bubbles and rafts But volcanoes are another possibility Gada Ale volcano. Source Smithsonian Institute Lake Assale syn. L. Karum . Afar region, Danakil Depression, Ethiopia Volcanics from VSA web site Hydrothermal vent complexes In Campos basin some seismic features, including what appear to be isolated mound-like buildups in the rift stage, have been interpreted as hydrothermal vent complexes by Alvarenga R. S. et al., 2016 Marine and Petroleum Geology 74, 12-25 From - Alvarenga R. S. et al., 2016 Seismic characteristics and distribution of hydrothermal vent complexes in the Cretaceous offshore rift section of the Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Marine and Petroleum Geology 74, 12-25 Clinoforms Do they exist Composition And in the absence of evidence that lacustrine carbonate factories could produce major high relief platforms and shed enough sediment to generate clinoforms, what could they be Are these rotated onlapping reflectors From der Mann, J Rigg, J W D. 2012 New Geological Insights Into the Santos Basin, Geo ExPro February 2012, p.38-40 Platform-interior topsets salt Barra Velha Platform-margin prograding clinoforms Some clinoforms are artefacts caused by steeply dipping salt salt Barra Velha Clinoforms in volcanics - lava deltas Lava Delta Clinoforms in Santos Basin - basalt, from the Pre-Salt, and other lava clinoforms have recently been described from the Rift stage in Campos Basin Clinoforms in basalts and diorites, Rift section, Campos Basin From Goldberg K. et al., Re-sedimented deposits in the rift section of the Campos Basin Marine and Petroleum Geology 80 2017 412-431 doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2016.11.022 Clinoform geometries - carbonates or lavas Prograding clinoforms with onlap and aggradation within an overall progradational package, Santos basin. From Buckley, J. P. et al. 2015 Geol Soc London, Spec Publ. 418, 175-191 Complex internal geometries from proven lava delta not from PreSalt But there clearly is relief on the present base of the salt How could this have been generated From der Mann, J Rigg, J W D. 2012 New Geological Insights Into the Santos Basin, Geo ExPro February 2012. p38-40 Could the relief be largely due to post- and some syn- Barra Velha faulting - erosion We do know that many researchers have highlighted the lack of significant extensional faulting visible on seismic in the South Atlantic basins, not consistent with the observed amount of thinning and subsidence. Marine evaporites Within the Santos Basin, extensional faulting within the pre-salt sag basin occurs up to the base of the evaporites and locally beyond extension clearly continued to the late Aptian Karner, G.D. Gamboa, L.A.P. 2007. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 285, 15 35, http doi.org 10.1144 SP285.2 Is there any hard evidence for structuration after deposition of the Barra Velha W-E correlation from across Santos Basin Total thickness of correlated package so-called Lula s fingers varies from 20.8 to 28.5 m mean 24.3 m . 9 gamma-defined cycles mean thickness 2.7 m comprise one or more shallowing-upwards cycles defined by basal laminites. Cycles are well sampled by core and SWC, and facies are very similar in all wells and include a range of unequivocally shallow-water facies e.g., microbial laminites and stromatolites . Cycles were deposited at same water depth but are now separated by 1 km vertical relief, indicating significant post-depositional, but pre-salt structuration. The Depositional Model The facies and the occurrence of cyclothems support a shallow evaporitic lake model - Wright Barnett 2015 Facies 1 Calcite shrub cementstones, with Mgsilicates or patchy traces of former Mg-silicates Reduction of gel precipitation allows rapid growth of calcite crystal shrub framestones by asymmetric growth of spherulites into lake waters Facies 2 Calcite spherulite floatstones, with Mgsilicates or traces of former Mg-silicate matrices Evaporation triggers Mg-silicate gel precipitation pH 9.5. Mg rapidly depleted. low Mg Ca. Spherulites grew in Mg-silicate gels, in low densities. Facies 3 Laminated calcimudstones with prominent ostracodes and vertebrate debris, early silica nodules From - Wright, V. P. Barnett, A. J. 2015 An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic Early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates. In Bosence, D. W. J. et al. eds Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 418, 209 219. Flooding phase reduced alkalinitysalinity allows influx of ostracodes and vertebrates also triggers silica precipitation as pH drops Photos from Terra et al. 2010, Boll. Geosci. Petrobras, 18, 1, 9-29 Wright P Tosca N 2016 A Geochemical Model for the Formation of the Pre-Salt Reservoirs, Santos Basin, Brazil Implications for Understanding Reservoir Distribution. Search and Discovery Article 51304 2016 Evaporation Thermo-dynamic modelling supports the generation of the cycles from evaporation Influx and freshening Isotopes Provisional isotopic data supports an evaporitic lake model with water bodies that had high area-depth ratios, that is, very shallow. Based especially on studies by Talbot 1990 from E African lakes, Sabato Ceraldi Green 2017 reasoned that a strong covariance is recorded in C O stable isotope data from carbonates from Kwanza, and suggested that while the correlation line .....which suggests a rather large area to depth ratio of the lake.. A small data set presented by by Hasiuk Kaczmarek 2015 from the Barra Velha from Santos Basin also supports this interpretation closed and shallow lakes Other unpublished data sets support these interpretations, and combined indicate that there was NO large, deep body of water nearby. Stable Isotope data Kwanza and Santos Similarities of Brazil data and Kwanza Sabato Ceraldi Green 2017. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 438, 77 98. http doi.org 10.1144 SP438.10 Santos basin Whole rock data from small data set presented by Hasiuk F J Kaczmarek S E 2015 AAPG Search and Discovery Article 51190 If the sedimentology and geochemistry indicate an evaporitic lake the Barra Velha was deposited in an under-filled lake basin in the sense of Carroll Bohacs 1999 Bohacs et al. 2000, AAPG Studies in Geology 46 underfilled closed basin lakes, with significant chemical sedimentation, produce dominantly aggradational stratal architecture So how can clinoforms be generated in an evaporitic, underfilled lake Alluvial fans-fan deltas are likely candidates. The thick carbonate grainstones and rudstones found locally in the Barra Velha could be shoreline deposits representing wave reworked sheet flood or terminal splay deposits. In arid extensional basins colluvial-alluvial wedges are a basic component of the deposystem Dip slope Alluvial fans being reworked by fluctuating lake shoreline in the Great Salt Desert, Utah Blair and Macpherson 1994 observed that alluvial fans have average slope values ranging from 1.5 to 25 , with values of 2 to 12 most typical. Conclusions For Santos Basin the weight of evidence suggests the main reservoir interval, the Barra Velha Formation did not develop as high-relief carbonate platforms Relief on the base salt was largely structural and post-Barra Velha in origin, not due to high-relief platforms and deep-lake basins during Barra Velha deposition As regards the isolated ridge-like and conical mounds, the main origins of such topography in closed rift basins are likely to be spring mounds and volcanoes Syn-and post-Barra Velha faulting, erosion and volcanism created features, including rotated onlap geometries, lava deltas and alluvial fans and fan deltas, mis-interpreted as related to high-relief buildups such as clinoforms, The evidence comes from Re-evaluation of seismic data Long-range correlations supporting extensive post-Barra Velha structuration Facies interpretations based on process-based analysis not on assumptions regarding unsubstantiated microbialite models, the former supported by geochemical modelling Isotopic data precluding the presence of large water bodies during the deposition of the Barra Velha

[END_OF_PAPER]

D1-2 The Bacalhau Field New Insights into Lacustrine Carbonate Platform Development, Santos Basin, Brazil D. Hunt1 Equinor1 Summary The giant pre-salt Bacalhau field in the Santos basin comprises two distinct Aptian Barra Velha Formation reservoir intervals BVE200 and BVE100 developed on an isolated lacustrine platform. The reservoirs were deposited onto a complex paleotopography comprising both rifted BVE300 Paraty volcanics and younger volcanic pedestal highs. Bacalhau is a high-pressure field, with a 500 m hydrocarbon column. Hydrocarbons occur in rocks interpreted as being from both shallow water platform top and slope environments. Here we discuss how comprehensive new data from the 2018 2019 appraisal campaign, integrated with existing well data, narrow-azimuth 3D seismic, together with stratigraphic- and seismic-forward modeling provides new insights as to the controls on 1 rifted and volcanic paleotopography, 2 relative lake-level changes, 3 dominant wind directions, and 4 slope re-deposition on lacustrine carbonate platform, margin, slope development and so reservoir heterogeneity. Second EAGE Conference on Pre-Salt Reservoir From Exploration to Production 8-10 September 2021, Online Introduction The giant pre-salt Bacalhau field in the Santos basin comprises two distinct Aptian Barra Velha Formation reservoir intervals BVE200 and BVE100 developed on an isolated lacustrine platform. The reservoirs were deposited onto a complex paleotopography comprising both rifted BVE300 Paraty volcanics and younger volcanic pedestal highs. Bacalhau is a high-pressure field, with a 500 m hydrocarbon column. Hydrocarbons occur in rocks interpreted as being from both shallow water platform top and slope environments. Here we discuss how comprehensive new data from the 2018 2019 appraisal campaign, integrated with existing well data, narrow-azimuth 3D seismic, together with stratigraphic- and seismic-forward modeling provides new insights as to the controls on 1 rifted and volcanic palaeotopography, 2 relative lake-level changes, 3 dominant wind directions, and 4 slope re-deposition on lacustrine carbonate platform, margin, slope development and so reservoir heterogeneity. Contrasting Carbonate Platform Foundations - Structure Volcanic Pedestals Paleotopography, developed through faulting of the Paraty basalts BVE300 , and the accretion of volcanic-pedestals related to a newly proven post-Paraty Picinguaba Magmatic Event act as a firstorder control on shallow water carbonate platform sedimentation in the Bacalhau field. In addition, syndepositional faulting occurred locally during deposition of both the Picinguaba volcanics and BVE200-100 reservoirs. Ridge-mounds in the Bacalhau field as also well-known from other pre-salt fields, grew preferentially onto post-BVE 300 fault-controlled structural highs in the SW-, S-, SC-, NC- and Nsectors of the field Fig. 1 . The result is an en-echelon pattern of ridge-mounds, with a preferred N-S and NNE-SSW orientation. Oblique ENE to WSW-trending fault relays control the position of saddles and the lateral steps in ridge-mound distribution. At a larger scale, a 16 km long 2 km wide faultcontrolled NNE-SSW trending intra-platform basin developed in the centre of the platform. Slope and clinoformal seismic facies are locally differentiated along its flanks. Figure 1 Table and map showing location of wells in the Bacalhau field, the different interpreted sectors, their foundations, position of saddles red ovals and comments on fault timing. Clockwise from bottom left on the map the sectors are SW southwest, W west, NW northwest, N north divided into , , subareas , NC north central, SC south central, S south, I Intraplatform. Second EAGE Conference on Pre-Salt Reservoir From Exploration to Production 8-10 September 2021, Online The W- and N-sectors of the field are characterized by two Picinguaba volcanic centres. In the W-sector, a wide BVE100 platform interior is developed onto i the eroded antecedent Picinguaba volcanic pedestal and ii prograding clinoformal sediments that onlap the flank the volcanic high. The clinoformal packages are thought to comprise reworked volcanics mixed with carbonates. In the Northsector of the platform, BVE200-100 carbonates are interpreted to flank a second Picinguaba volcanic pedestal, that may be locally bald Fig. 1, N . Platform Asymmetry The W- and SW-sectors of the platform show similar asymmetry in mound development Figs. 1, 2 . Smaller discontinuous en-echelon mounds occur along the eastern margin to the W- and SWsectors, whereas continuous raised mounded margins mark their north and west margins Figs. 1, 2 . In contrast, non-rimmed ramp-like margins occur on the southern margins of the W- and SW-sectors, and here mounds are absent e.g. Fig. 2 . This asymmetry in margin architecture can be interpreted in terms of a windward-leeward platform asymmetry, and is suggestive of dominant N-to-S and NW-to-SE directed winds in the W- and SW-sectors of the field Fig. 2 . Orientation of the seismic-scale margins in the W-sector is also reflected in the preferred dip of m-scale unidirectional shrub bedforms in the platform interior c. 15 of succession, see Figs. 2, 3 . There is however, a very different asymmetry of ridge-mounds developed in the S-, SC- and NC-platform-sectors. In these sectors there is a pronounced S-to-N and SW-to-NE asymmetry in buildup and clinoform development. This asymmetry is entirely in agreement with regional patterns observed in pre-salt carbonate platforms i.e. Tremblay et al. 2014, Minzoni et al. 2021, Fig. 3 . This asymmetry is well captured in stratigraphic forward modeling experiments. The observed contrasts in platform asymmetry across the Bacalhau field W- and SW-sectors vs S-, SC- and NC-sectors is here taken to suggest that the field is developed in a unique basin position with respect to dominant wind-cells Fig. 2 . It is suggested that the field is impacted by two competing axial wind cells, as for example observed today in the southern Red Sea rift i.e. Purkis et al., 2015 . Platform Interior vs Slope Sedimentation Two new wells in the field test very different depositional environments and show significant contrast in terms of deposition diagenesis, net to gross N G and reservoir quality. 3-EQNR-1-SPS is positioned close to the centre of the BVE100 platform interior. Transgressive high energy mixed reworked volcaniclastics and carbonates rest unconformably onto the Picinguaba volcanics Fig. 3A . The overlying gently dipping highly cyclic carbonate succession is generally low energy. Figure 2 Figure showing lower left N-S seismic line through the W-sector showing pronounced Nto-S platform asymmetry with a mounded northern margin and a subtle ramp-like southern margin. Diagram at centre shows inferred wind directions from m-scale bedforms in 3-EQNR-1-SPS see Fig. 3 for conceptualization . At right the arrows show the relative strength and orientation of interpreted wind-directions. Second EAGE Conference on Pre-Salt Reservoir From Exploration to Production 8-10 September 2021, Online In contrast, 3-EQNR-3-SPS is located downflank, c. 450 m east and c. 200-225 m below the time-equivalent BVE100 platform-top. It encountered a c. 270m m BVE200-100 succession of steeply dipping mean 35 largely redeposited slope rudstone breccias and megabreccias. N G and reservoir quality in this well is high. Base-Level Changes Base-level curves have been extracted from both NC- and SW- sectors of the field based on pinning point criteria in seismic data onlaps, mound crest, top of flat topped platforms . The curves are comparable between sectors, and suggest an overall BVE200-100 base-level rise of up to 450 m, punctuated by several falls of 80 m. Comparison to other pre-salt fields suggest that Bacalhau underwent greater BVE100 aggradation, triggering BVE100 ridge-mound development. Figure 3 A Conceptual diagram showing for the BVE100 in 3-EQNR-1-SPS. B Unidirectional bedforms as seen in borehole image logs and realization of the proportion of unidirectional shrub bedforms as shown in A . Summary The Bacalhau field represents an isolated carbonate platform dissected by a fault-controlled intraplatform basin. Shallow water platform sedimentation was founded onto faulted BVE300 Paraty basalts and post-Paraty volcanic pedestal highs the latter remnants from the Pincinguaba Magmatic Event . Syndepositional faulting continued locally during BVE200-100 deposition. Ridge-mounds are locally developed in the BVE200-100 and show a well-developed en-echelon distribution. Continued BVE200-100 ridge-mound development resulted from high rates of relative lake level rise. Asymmetry in platform development is interpreted to reflect dominant wind directions, and these appear to differ across the platform, linked to the location of the platform in the southern Santos basin. Coarse sediments redeposited into slope settings make for excellent reservoir quality on the flanks for the platform. References Minzoni, M., Cantelli, A., Thornton, J. Wignall, B. 2021 Seismic-Scale Geometries and Sequence-Stratigraphic Architecture of Early Cretaceous Syn-Post Rift Carbonate Systems, Presalt Section, Brazil. In Hendry, J., Burgess, P., Hunt, D., Janson, X. and Zampetti, V. eds Seismic Characterization of Carbonate Platforms and Reservoirs. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 509. DOI https doi.org 10.1144 SP509-2019-78. Purkis, S. J., Harris, P. M., Ellis, J. 2015 The Contemporary Red Sea as an Analog for Ancient Carbonates in Rift Settings. AAPG Search and Discovery, Article 51139. Tremblay, S., Verwer, K., Lukasik, J. 2014. New insight into the seismic architecture of the pre-salt upper sag carbonate depositional system, Brazil abs. . AAPG Search and Discovery, Article 90189. Second EAGE Conference on Pre-Salt Reservoir From Exploration to Production 8-10 September 2021, Online

[END_OF_PAPER]

t Technical papers Multiattribute framework analysis for the identification of carbonate mounds in the Brazilian presalt zone Carlos Jesus1, Maria Olho Azul2, Wagner Moreira Lupinacci3, and Leandro Machado4 Abstract Carbonate mounds, as described herein, often present seismic characteristics such as low amplitude and a high density of faults and fractures, which can easily be oversampled and blur other rock features in simple geobody extraction processes. We have developed a workflow for combining geometric attributes and hybrid spectral decomposition HSD to efficiently identify good-quality reservoirs in carbonate mounds within the complex environment of the Brazilian presalt zone. To better identify these reservoirs within the seismic volume of carbonate mounds, we divide our methodology into four stages seismic data acquisition and processing overview, preconditioning of seismic data using structural-oriented filtering and imaging enhancement, calculation of seismic attributes, and classification of seismic facies. Although coherence and curvature attributes are often used to identify high-density fault and fracture zones, representing one of the most important features of carbonate mounds, HSD is necessary to discriminate low-amplitude carbonate mounds good reservoir quality from low-amplitude clay zones nonreservoir . Finally, we use a multiattribute facies classification to generate a geologically significant outcome and to guide a final geobody extraction that is calibrated by well data and that can be used as a spatial indicator of the distribution of good reservoir quality for static modeling. Introduction Brazil has been producing oil from presalt carbonate reservoirs over the past decade. Recently, these reservoirs attained an incredible output of just more than 1.7 million barrels of oil equivalent per day, representing more than half of the country s daily production and demonstrating the importance of these carbonate reservoirs to Brazil. However, it is tremendously challenging to map and characterize these carbonate reservoirs given their considerable spatial heterogeneity, complex pore systems, and often ambiguous seismic responses. Burgess et al. 2013 define criteria for discriminating different carbonate features in a seismic image that involve regional constraints, analysis of basic seismic geometries, and analyses of geophysical details and finer scale seismic geometries. For the purpose of this work, we adopted analyses of seismic geometries and geophysical details, as well as amplitude anomalies and the behavior of frequencies in the reservoir interval, together with the high density of faults and fractures, to define carbonate features, many of which were assessed at a subseismic scale Wright and Rodriguez, 2018 . Here, we propose a workflow for identifying and characterizing carbonate mounds in the Brazilian presalt zone using a combination of hybrid spectral decomposition HSD together with geometric attributes and curvature and coherence attributes. For this work, we use the term carbonate mounds to describe almost conical carbonate bodies of pronounced relief that are often difficult to map seismically due to their ambiguous limits and internal low-amplitude reflectors, but that exhibit excellent reservoir quality in terms of matrix and associated fracturing and that have been successfully drilled, evaluated, and tested. It is beyond the scope of this work to interpret these features further or to establish their depositional environment. For a broader perception of the many interpretations of these presalt carbonates we suggest, amongst others, the works of Wright and Barnett 2017 on Barra Velha Formation depositional systems, Buckley et al. 2015 on early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonate platforms, Wright and Barnett 2017 on depositional models for the presalt Barra Velha Formation, and Wright and Rodriguez 2018 on depositional interpretations of presalt environments and their links to seismic facies. Our 1 Petrogal Brasil S.A., Rio de Janeiro, Brazil and Universidade Federal Fluminense, Niteroi, Brazil. E-mail carlosfzk gmail.com. Petrogal Brasil S.A., Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. E-mail mariaolhoazul petrogalbrasil.com. 3 Universidade Federal Fluminense, Niteroi, Brazil. E-mail wagnerlupinacci id.uff.br. 4 Emerson Automation Solutions, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. E-mail leandro.machado emerson.com. Manuscript received by the Editor 3 January 2018 revised manuscript received 10 November 2018 published ahead of production 08 February 2019 published online 01 April 2019. This paper appears in Interpretation, Vol. 7, No. 2 May 2019 p. T467 T476, 12 FIGS., 2 TABLES. 2 http dx.doi.org 10.1190 INT-2018-0004.1. 2019 Society of Exploration Geophysicists and American Association of Petroleum Geologists. All rights reserved. Interpretation May 2019 T467 Downloaded from https pubs.geoscienceworld.org interpretation article-pdf 7 2 T467 4698394 int-2018-0004.1.pdf by Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul user workflow is focused on characterizing seismic facies and their relationship to present-day reservoir quality, which we believe can be applied and adjusted to different settings within the Brazilian presalt sequence. Our intent is to detail a workflow that can facilitate mapping of present-day good reservoir quality carbonate mound geometries to enable their characterization from a seismic perspective and to allow assessment of their spatial distribution for the purposes of reservoir modeling during the exploration and appraisal stages. Seismic attenuation can greatly affect the quality of seismic signals perpetuated at considerable depths Lupinacci and Oliveira, 2015 Yuan et al., 2017 . Consequently, mapping carbonate mounds in the Brazilian presalt fields, which lie at depths ranging between 5000 and 6000 m and below an approximately 2000 m thick layer of salt, is a major challenge for geoscientists because of low seismic illumination and low-amplitude anomalies, low impedance, and the high fault and fracture density that are characteristic of these geologic features. It is difficult to identify and delineate such features in these presalt fields using only seismic data because of the complexity of the seismic image generated and the absence of impedance contrast between the reservoir and adjacent sealing facies Zheng et al., 2007 . Despite many criteria for presalt seismic data having already been defined, we consider in this study that general information about the acquisition and processing of such data is essential to understanding its ambiguities and limitations. Furthermore, because seismic data can be contaminated by random and coherent noise arising from data acquisition or complex geology that can bias results even after data processing and migration Chopra and Marfurt, 2007 , data preconditioning is crucial to obtain good results Lupinacci et al., 2017 . With respect to carbonate reservoir characterization, seismic facies analysis is increasingly seen as an effective way of estimating reservoir properties Matos et al., 2007 , combining different seismic attributes through pattern recognition algorithms, such as seismic multiattributes analysis Rongchang et al., 2017 to identify, for example, lateral changes in a reservoir. Seismic attributes are important tools for reservoir characterization that can help to visually enhance or quantify features of interest Chopra and Marfurt, 2007 . However, selection of seismic attributes for analysis should be made with caution so as not to propagate false interpretations. Curvature and coherence attributes can be used together in seismic multiattribute analyses to increase the reliability of this type of geologic analysis. The curvature attribute describes how bent a curve is at a point along its length Roberts, 2001 , focusing on changes in shape. This attribute is a good predictor of faults, as well as anticline and syncline structures Klein et al., 2008 because it is not affected by variations in amplitude related to changes in lithology and fluid. The coherence cube attribute a measure of the similarity between neighboring seismic traces in three dimensions has been used since 1995 Bahorich and Farmer, 1995 as a powerful seismic interpretation tool for imaging geologic discontinuities, such as faults and fractures, which are recurrently associated with carbonate mound features in this study area. However, many ways of calculating coherence can be implemented. Here, we applied the eigenvalue-coherence algorithm Gersztenkorn and Marfurt, 1999 Marfurt et al., 1999 , which uses several adjacent traces within a local window to estimate discontinuity for each sample. Spectral decomposition is another widely used attribute for identifying seismic patterns. It can represent the seismic trace in a frequency domain or in subbands of frequencies. It can be used to identify subtle thickness variations and discontinuities, as well as to predict bedding thicknesses e.g., Partyka et al., 1999 . Spectral decomposition can also be used to identify low-frequency shadow, which may indicate the presence of hydrocarbons Sun et al., 2002 Wang, 2007 or as in this study, to identify good quality reservoirs upon calibration by the well-log porosity response. Additionally, a frequency bandwidth related to seismic facies can be selected from a spectral decomposition analysis, so a specific amplitude range can be isolated that represents a reservoir anomaly called HSD Jesus et al., 2017 . Pattern recognition and classification of seismic features is fundamental to seismic data interpretation Zhao et al., 2015 , so uniting different criteria through several seismic attributes and establishing seismic facies classes is an excellent approach for isolating reservoirs of good quality in presalt carbonate mounds from shale or tight zones nonreservoir . We propose a workflow for identifying and characterizing carbonate mounds in the Brazilian presalt zone using a combination of HSD with curvature and coherence geometric attributes. We chose those attributes because of their ability to provide useful geologic information and used them to generate a seismic facies classification to specifically identify good-quality reservoirs in carbonate mounds. The extracted geobody was then used as a spatial indicator of the distribution of porosity in the reservoir. Methodology As described in Burgess et al. 2013 , there is no clear set of diagnostic criteria for identifying many specific carbonate features, especially in frontier regions. From a geophysical perspective, the Brazilian presalt zone is still a frontier area, and given the influence of salt thickness on image quality of seismic data, seismic acquisition and processing details need to be carefully understood prior to performing any proposed methodology for seismic data interpretation. Our workflow starts with preconditioning of the seismic data Figure 1 using structural-oriented filtering SOF to remove some background noise and preserve fault edges. The SOF volume is then used to generate T468 Interpretation May 2019 Downloaded from https pubs.geoscienceworld.org interpretation article-pdf 7 2 T467 4698394 int-2018-0004.1.pdf by Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul user the curvature attribute. In parallel and to improve the overall vertical resolution, an image enhancement is applied to the SOF volume to calculate a coherence cube, which facilitates better identification of the faulted and fractured character of these presalt carbonate mounds. We also apply HSD to the SOF volume to identify low-amplitude zones, which correspond to areas of good porosity. All of these seismic attributes are then combined to classify the seismic facies, which allow us to distinguish the most important facies representing good reservoir quality carbonate mounds and to extract a geobody that can then be used as a spatial control for porosity distribution in reservoir modeling. Our methodology for characterizing carbonate mounds is thus divided into four stages 1 seismic data acquisition and processing overview, 2 preconditioning of seismic data, 3 calculation of seismic attributes, and 4 classification of seismic facies. We describe these processing stages in detail in the following sections. Seismic data acquisition and processing overview The seismic acquisition was performed in 2013 from a single vessel equipped with 12 streamers, 8000 m in length and dual sources. The seismic data were recorded with an azimuth direction of 123 , a sampling rate of 2 ms, and a nominal fold of 80. Seismic acquisition parameters are presented in Table 1. Depth imaging and velocity model building VMB in deepwater environments with complex and large evaporated layers is challenging for seismic illumination. These seismic acquisition parameters are not ideal for seismic illumination of presalt reservoirs. Had the seismic data been acquired as broadband, we could have applied a more efficient seismic processing. The initial VMB was rendered on legacy data to obtain a more realistic and geologically relevant outcome by first applying an isotropic model for the initial step and then deriving a tilted transversal isotropic model from the tomographic data along with the seismic inversion Bakulin et al., 2010 . To decrease the well-to-seismic mistie, we updated the anisotropy models based on the well markers. Another important strategy we adopted for the VMB was to divide the salt layer using intermediate horizons that separated stratified salt from homogeneous salt. The background starting salt velocity for the tomography was 4500 m s, and then we applied a weighted mask to guide the tomography and produce a stronger update in the stratified salt layer. This strategy made it possible to establish a more precise velocity model for the presalt zone. Preconditioning of seismic data According to Ho ecker and Fehmers 2002 , three premises are required to apply filters successfully on poststack seismic data orientation analysis, edge detection, and smoothing with edge preservation. Furthermore, considering the criteria we adopted in this case study which include amplitude, frequency anoma- lies, geometry, and fault and fracture density , application of SOF should guarantee that the quality of the data improves without having to change the criteria. To improve the quality of the seismic data contaminated with background noise, we applied SOF and image enhancement Figure 2b and 2c to precondition the seismic data Qi et al., 2014 . Preconditioning should be concentrated in the region of interest. The aim of SOF is to improve the lateral continuity of the seismic reflector and increase the signal-to-noise ratio. The SOF algorithm applies volumetric dip and azimuth calculations to avoid smearing of faults, fractures, and other discontinuities using an overlapping window method Marfurt, 2006 . We used the SOF output to calculate an image enhancement through increasing the frequency bandwidth Bruce and Caldwell, 2003 , thereby bolstering weak frequencies to reduce the effect of attenuation Figure 2c . This step could be considered a type of spectral enhancement, the objective of which was to improve seismic resolution by increasing the frequency bandwidth. This process does not create Seismic data Spectral decomposition Structure oriented filtering Hybrid spectral decompostion Image enhancement Curvature Coherence Figure 1. Steps used to calculate the seismic attributes. Table 1. Acquisition parameters. Acquisition parameters Shot interval Cell length Cell width Line orientation Near offset inline Source numbers Source separation Source depth Streamer numbers Streamer length Group interval Group length Streamer depth Streamer separation 25 m 6.25 m 12.5 m 123 or 303 150 m 2 25 m 7m 12 8000 m 12.5 m 12.5 m 9m 50 m Interpretation May 2019 T469 Downloaded from https pubs.geoscienceworld.org interpretation article-pdf 7 2 T467 4698394 int-2018-0004.1.pdf by Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul user new frequencies it only enhances the contribution of some frequencies existing within the seismic data to better define the reservoir architecture. Calculation of seismic attributes The seismic attributes were calculated after SOF and image enhancement. The curvature and spectral decomposition attributes were generated directly from SOF. The coherence attribute was derived from the image-enhancement step. The HSD was obtained from the spectral decomposition step. The steps for calculating the seismic attributes are shown in Figure 1. The curvature attribute describes how a surface deviates from being planar Figure 3 . Basically, it measures subtle lateral and vertical changes in dip that are often dominated by strong localized deformation for example, carbonate reefs on 20 dipping surfaces can present the same curvature anomaly as a carbonate reef on a flat surface Chopra and Marfurt, 2007 . In this case study, several curvature attributes were tested, including the most positive, most negative, and dip curvatures. We found that dip curvatures, which are acquired by extracting the curvature in the direction of maximum dip, presented the best result. Volume curvature attributes can enhance seismic resolution, providing more in- Positive curvature 0 Anticline 0 0 0 Zero curvature Syncline z 0 - x Negative curvature Figure 3. Curvature attribute in two dimensions, indicating that this attribute is positive in an anticline, negative in a syncline, and zero in a flat or dipping plane. b a 4.0 5.200 2.0 5.400 0 5.600 1.0 0.8 Amplitude 5.000 Depth m Figure 2. Preconditioning. a Input, b frequency content of input, c SOF, d frequency content of SOF, e imaging enhancement, and f frequency content of imaging enhancement. sight into fault delineation and aiding in the prediction of fractures and their orientations Roberts, 2001 Chopra and Marfurt, 2007 . The curvature attribute is very susceptible to noise, so we calculated it after SOF. The coherence attribute requires a central trace as a reference to make correlations between neighboring seismic traces using a vertical analysis window Figure 4 . Geologically, highly coherent seismic traces or waveforms indicate a laterally continuous lithology. Abrupt changes in waveform can indicate faults and fractures in the sediments Chopra and Marfurt, 0.6 0.4 0.2 2.0 5.800 2 km 0 6.000 4.0 5.000 4.0 30 40 50 60 2.0 5.400 0 5.600 50 60 50 60 1.0 0.8 Amplitude 5.200 Depth m 20 Frequency Hz d c 0.6 0.4 0.2 2.0 5.800 0 2 km 6.000 4.0 5.000 4.0 10 20 30 40 Frequency Hz f 5.200 2.0 5.400 0 5.600 2.0 1.0 0.8 Amplitude e Depth m 10 0.6 0.4 0.2 5.800 2 km 6.000 T470 Interpretation May 2019 Downloaded from https pubs.geoscienceworld.org interpretation article-pdf 7 2 T467 4698394 int-2018-0004.1.pdf by Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul user 0 4.0 10 20 30 40 Frequency Hz 2007 . According several tests, it was possible to see that the difference between the curvature calculation results before and after image enhancement is that after image enhancement, there is the risk of boost up some noise and this attribute is very sensitive to noise. And, coherence shows to be more effective after improvement of the resolution. We used the coherence attribute to search along structural dips because it helps to reveal the true edges. After we analyzed the dominant frequency and identified the frequency bandwidth that best represents the target, we used HSD to decompose the seismic data into frequency bands. This frequency bandwidth is selected to calculate the envelope attribute from which a specific amplitude range is isolated Jesus et al., 2017 . We obtained the HSD parameters after SOF application to maintain the proportionality of the amplitude and thereby preserve the reservoir anomalies. To achieve an optiCrossline mized HSD for the area of interest, two steps are required a sensitivity study stage 1 and an isolation study of frequency ranges and representative amplitudes stage 2 . 3, we identified the dominant frequency as being approximately 8 Hz. Also, as part of our sensitivity study and using the same interval, we generated a root-meansquare rms amplitude map to identify low-amplitude zones, which is a recurring characteristic of presalt carbonate mounds. As illustrated in Figure 5b, all wells except for well 4 are in low-amplitude zones. Stage 2 After our sensitivity study had revealed the frequency best representing the interval of interest and we had identified the respective low-amplitude zones through stage 1, we could isolate the frequency and amplitude ranges by applying a short-time Fourier transform STFT with a Hanning window for spectral Neighbour trace W Central trace Neighbour trace T Stage 1 For the sensitivity study, performed between the top and base of the reservoir of interest, we generated a dominant frequency attribute Figure 5a and selected the dominant frequency that best represented the reservoir interval. By analyzing the dominant frequency map at well locations 1, 2, and a Inline Figure 4. Spatial or multitrace analysis windows used to calculate the coherence attribute W is defined as the vertical analysis window for time T . b c 17000 20 140 16000 Well 2 14000 12000 4 km 10000 N Well 2 Well 3 10 Well 4 4 km Well 2 100 Well 3 70 Well 4 4 km 5 N 35 N 8800 10 km Well 1 15 Magnitude Well 4 Well 1 Frequency Hz Well 3 Acoustic impedance m s g cm 3 Well 1 0 10 km 0 10 km Figure 5. a Acoustic impedance, b dominant frequency, and c rms amplitude maps. Interpretation May 2019 T471 Downloaded from https pubs.geoscienceworld.org interpretation article-pdf 7 2 T467 4698394 int-2018-0004.1.pdf by Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul user decomposition of the SOF volume Figure 6 and decompose the seismic data into frequency subbands. By knowing the representative frequency and well outcomes at the best well locations wells 1 3 and identifying the low-amplitude zones for the presalt carbonate mounds being investigated, we could isolate the frequency and amplitude associated with the carbonate mounds by selecting a dominant frequency subband of 8 Hz and then calculating an envelope attribute for this subband. To define the interval for the envelope that represents these presalt carbonate mounds, it was necessary to also use the acoustic-impedance volume, which assumes a low-impedance occurrence in the mound zones represented by wells 1 3 whereas well 4 was defined as nonreservoir . As well 4 also presented a high value for the 8 Hz envelope, we established a cutoff to effectively isolate the carbonate mounds by combining the 8 Hz dominant frequency with the acoustic-impedance volume representing a low impedance for the carbonate mounds. Where the 8 Hz envelope and acoustic impedance presented low values, the area was considered a carbonate mound, but when only the envelope-attribute value was low, the area was considered a nonreservoir Table 2 . We applied a maximum cutoff value of 0.27 for the envelope attribute to discriminate between reservoirs and nonreservoirs. Finally, the following script was applied to the envelope attribute for 8 Hz as the dominant frequency spectral decomposition to generate the HSD HSD 1 4 IF Envelope Value 1 4 540 THEN Envelope 1 4 Envelope ELSE Envelope 1 4 541 Accordingly, if the envelope value was less than or equal to 540, then the value was retained to represent reservoirs otherwise, the standard value of 541 was assigned representing nonreservoirs . The spectral decomposition and HSD for the top reservoir horizon are shown in Figure 7. A southeast to northwest trend of low amplitude passing through wells 2 and 3 can be seen in Figure 7a, which can be associated with the carbonate mounds. Figure 7b reveals that HSD was better than spectral decomposition in identifying the main low-amplitude trend corresponding to carbonate mounds wells 2 and 3 . Figure 8 shows the main quality control of HSD, where pseudolog data from HSD was extracted at each well location wells 1 4 and compared with the total porosity log rescaled to seismic output. The quality control showed a good correlation between HSD pseudolog and total porosity, so for low HSD values, there is an inversely proportional high value for total porosity. This outcome increases the confidence in our HSD. Seismic facies classification Seismic facies can be defined as a group of seismic responses with characteristics that distinctly differ Table 2. Correlation between envelope and acoustic impedance. Attributes Reservoir mounds Nonreservoir shale Envelope Acoustic impedance Low value Low value High value Low value 1 Figure 6. Schematic of stage 2 for optimization and application of HSD. First, the STFT is applied and a frequency band is selected. Then, the envelope attribute is calculated. 8 Hz 1 Time s 4 1 km 6 Seismic data decomposition using STFT 6 1 km 1 15 Hz 4 1 Time s 1 Time s 4 Seismic data 1 1 km 6 33 Hz 1 Time s 4 1 6 Time s 1Km 6 T472 Interpretation May 2019 Downloaded from https pubs.geoscienceworld.org interpretation article-pdf 7 2 T467 4698394 int-2018-0004.1.pdf by Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul user 2 Envelope attribute 1 Frequency band selected with a dominant frequency of 8 Hz 4 1 Time s 2 x10 4 3 1 km 6 1 km 1 Magnitude Magnitude from other facies John et al., 2008 . According to and its adjacent neighbors are adjusted toward the sample input, and this step is repeated for 65 iterations so Farzadi 2006 , a 3D multiattribute seismic facies clasthat the optimal facies model along with its closest sification helps to identify lithofacies and geometric neighbors become more like the selected input sample. variations within carbonate features. The seismic facies Figure 10 we obtained in this Our selection of the seismic attributes is based on the work were generated using the following parameters geologic information that each attribute could provide five classes, PCA with three components, and an unsuto identify the good reservoir quality geometries we pervised neural network method. The number of sought. The curvature attribute was useful for identifyclasses is defined empirically through what we term ing the fractures and fault zones based on the curvature a 360 approach Figure 11 that consists of the foland discontinuities in the seismic reflector Figure 9a . lowing iterative loops 1 obtain all seismic attributes The coherence attribute also proved useful for identifyand analyze them to see if they honor the defined criing high-density fault zones in the carbonate reservoir teria 2 perform quality control using well information Figure 9b . We apply HSD in our workflow because in this work, we compare total porosity with HSD presalt carbonate mounds typically exhibit low ampli 3 run unsupervised seismic facies classification tudes due to fractures increasing their porosity. All 4 select representative facies with features of good these attributes curvature, coherence, and HSD are reservoir quality carbonate mounds and observe the then combined for seismic facies classification, which resultant geobody extraction 5 crosscheck the geois constrained from the top to the base of the reservoir. body distribution versus hydraulic flow unit HFU , The clustering technique that we use is unsuperwhere HFU 2 and 3 means there is no flow and HFU vised, which aims to partition the data set into clusters 4 means there is flow and 6 finish the process if without a priori information concerning the memberthe results are consistent with the well-log response ship in a given cluster of a sample input Xu and Wunsch, 2005 . We use a neural network as the algoa b rithm for this unsupervised analysis because a priori 541 2000 tests show that it generates a partition with gradual changes in seismic facies patterns. Well 2 Well 2 The input data are highly dimensional and volumiWell 1 Well 1 nous, which can be problematic for seismic facies classification. Redundancy and excess dimensionality can Well 3 Well 3 be reduced by principal component analysis PCA 1000 270 Zhao et al., 2015 , through which the input data set Well 4 Well 4 is projected into a lower dimensional space formed 4 km 4 km by a subset of the highest variance principal components Bishop, 1995 . PCA and self-organizing maps SOM represent N N multiattributes analyses that have proven excellent ap0 0 proaches for pattern recognition during seismic inter10 km 10 km pretation and reservoir characterization Roden et al., 2015 Zhao et al., 2015 . PCA can be used to convert Figure 7. a Spectral decomposition and b HSD. statistical relationships among multidimensional data into simple, geometric relationships and to organize a data set of seismic Well 1 Well 2 Well 3 Well 4 HSD POROSITY HSD POROSITY HSD POROSITY HSD POROSITY attributes into a geometric SOM Matos et al., 2007 , producing a partition with Top T op rreservoir esservoir eser eservoir i Top T op reservoir reser ese servoir voii 5600 changing patterns of seismic facies. In Top T op rreservoir eser e ser se voir oir Top T oop op ppreservoir r reservoir i irr Top T reser es eservoi e se sser ervoi voi vo oi o this work, we apply PCA with three 5650 components. To do this, we organized the model facies into a sequence of 5700 reference vectors in one dimension. The main purpose of PCA in this case 5750 is to assess the relative weights between curvature, coherence, and HSD, and 5800 thereby minimize redundancy. An optimal facies model is established through 5850 an iterative adaptation process. The 5900 Base reservoir B i Base reservoir B i clustering process starts by first specifyBase reservoir Base reservoir ing arbitrary nodes. Then, a sample input is chosen and mapped to the Figure 8. The HSD pseudolog black and the porosity log red are well-correlated inversely . These logs were used as a quality control. closest node. The optimal facies model 0.5 0.8 0.0 0.1 0.2 0 0.15 0.3 0.0 0.1 0.2 0 0.15 0.3 0.0 0.1 0.2 0 0.6 1.2 0.0 0.1 0.2 Depth m 0.1 Interpretation May 2019 T473 Downloaded from https pubs.geoscienceworld.org interpretation article-pdf 7 2 T467 4698394 int-2018-0004.1.pdf by Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul user and, if not, rerun it but change the key parameters in our case, we changed the HSD cutoffs and the number of seismic facies . Results and discussion The outcomes of applying the curvature and coherence attributes to the structural map of the top of the reservoir are shown in Figure 9a and 9b. Low coherence values and high variations in curvature were found around the carbonate mounds, indicating a high density of faults and fracture zones. We use the wells as a quality control to interpret the results of our HSD. We first calculate pseudologs of the HSD with a central frequency of 8 Hz that behaved similarly to the background model for seismic inversion. Inverse correlations between the pseudologs of the HSD and porosity for each well are presented in quality control Figure 8 . Well 4, which is in a clay zone, presents low HSD values. Geometric attributes curvature and coherence were used to identify zones with a high density of faults and fractures, typical of carbonate mounds, for the seismic facies classification. Those attributes are also combined with the HSD data. We chose five classes of seismic facies, and a facies map indicating reservoir heterogeneities is provided in Figure 10. This map reveals facies connectivity. Facies 1 3 were identified in our 360 approach as carbonate mounds with high porosity and a high density of fractures, representing the best reservoirs. In this work, we consider classes 4 and 5 as nonreservoirs in terms of their quality. Figure 12 shows the extracted geobody of facies 1 3 1 Multi-attributes analysis 6 a Geobody X well responde Quality control 2 Facies classification 3 b Well 2 Well 1 360 High Pos Well 2 Well 1 Well 3 Geobody X HFU 5 3, 4 and 5 rock type Well 3 Coherence 0 Amplitude Well 4 4 km Geobody extraction Well 4 4 km 4 Figure 11. Illustration of our 360 approach applied in this work. N N Low Neg 10 km 10 km Figure 9. a Curvature and b coherence attributes applied to the structural map of the top of the reservoir, revealing faults and fracture zones around the wells. Well 2 Well 1 Top reservoir Well 2 Well 1 4 km Well 3 Base reservoir Top of mound Well 4 4 km N 1 2 3 4 5 Seismic facies 10 km Figure 10. Seismic facies. Structural map of the top of the reservoir, highlighting the carbonate mounds. Figure 12. Geobody of carbonate mounds extracted from seismic facies classification. T474 Interpretation May 2019 Downloaded from https pubs.geoscienceworld.org interpretation article-pdf 7 2 T467 4698394 int-2018-0004.1.pdf by Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul user classified as good reservoir quality carbonate mounds. It is noteworthy that wells 2 and 3 are in this geobody, whereas wells 1 and 4 are in an area not identified as a carbonate mound, corroborating the well-log response. Conclusion The proposed workflow proved efficient in identifying good reservoir quality carbonate mounds within the complex environment of the Brazilian presalt zone. The coherence and curvature attributes were useful tools for identifying faults and fracture zones, high densities of which represent one of the most important characteristics of carbonate mounds. Because low seismic amplitude is also a typical feature of presalt carbonate mounds, we used HSD that allowed us to discriminate good reservoir quality carbonate mounds from poor reservoir zones as identified for well 4 . Our multiattributes facies classification generated a geologically significant outcome for static modeling, and the extracted geobody was used as an additional spatial indicator of porosity distribution. This workflow has been successfully applied in three other presalt carbonate fields. Acknowledgments The authors thank Petrogal Brasil for providing seismic data and support, especially the Exploration and Development Group. The authors also thank our partners, Petrobras and Shell, for their helpful feedback. Data and materials availability Data associated with this research are confidential and cannot be released. References Bahorich, M., and S. Farmer, 1995, 3D seismic discontinuity for faults and stratigraphic features The coherence cube The Leading Edge, 14, 1053 1058, doi 10.1190 1 .1437077. Bakulin, A., M. Woodward, D. Nichols, K. Osypov, and O. Zdraveva, 2010, Building tilted transversely isotropic depth models using localized anisotropic tomography with well information Geophysics, 75, no. 4, D27 D36, doi 10.1190 1.3453416. Bishop, C. M., 1995, Neural networks for pattern recognition Oxford University Press. Bruce, Z. S., and D. H. Caldwell, 2003, A bandwidth enhancement workflow through wavelet analysis 73rd Annual International Meeting, SEG, Expanded Abstracts, 2012 2015, doi 10.1190 1.1817725. Buckley, J. P., D. Bosence, and C. Elders, 2015, Tectonic setting and stratigraphic architecture of an early cretaceous lacustrine carbonate platform, Sugar Loaf High, Santos basin, Brazil Geological Society of London, Special Publications, 175 191. Burgess, P. M., P. Winefield, M. Minzoni, and C. Elders, 2013, Methods for identification of isolated carbonate buildups from seismic reflection data AAPG Bulletin, 97, 1071 1098, doi 10.1306 12051212011. Chopra, S., and K. J. Marfurt, 2007, Seismic attribute for prospect identification and reservoir characterization SEG 11. Farzadi, P., 2006, Seismic facies analysis based on 3D multi-attribute volume classification, Dariyan Formation, SE Persian Gulf Journal of Petroleum Geology, 29, 159 174, doi 10.1111 j.1747-5457.2006.00159.x. Gersztenkorn, A., and K. J. Marfurt, 1999, Eigenstructurebased coherence computations as an aid to 3-D structural and stratigraphic mapping Geophysics, 64, 1468 1479, doi 10.1190 1.1444651. Ho ecker, C., and G. Fehmers, 2002, Fast structural interpretation with structure-oriented filtering The Leading Edge, 21, 238 243, doi 10.1190 1.1463775. Jesus, C. A. C., M. Olho Azul, W. M. Lupinacci, and L. Machado, 2017, Mapping of carbonate mounds in the Brazilian presalt zone 86th Annual International Meeting, SEG, Expanded Abstracts, 3298 3303, doi 10.1190 segam2017-17789870.1. John, A., L. W. Lake, C. Torres-Verdin, and S. Srinivasan, 2008, Seismic facies identification and classification using simple statistics SPE Reservoir Evaluation and Engineering, 11, 984 990, doi 10.2118 96577-PA. Klein, P., L. Richard, and H. James, 2008, 3D curvature attributes A new approach for seismic interpretation First Break, 26, 105 111. Lupinacci, W. M., A. P. Franco, S. A. M. Oliveira, and F. S. Moraes, 2017, A combined time-frequency filtering strategy for Q-factor compensation of poststack seismic data Geophysics, 82, no. 1, V1 V6, doi 10.1190 geo2015-0470.1. Lupinacci, W. M., and S. A. M. Oliveira, 2015, Q factor estimation from the amplitude spectrum of the time-frequency transform of stacked reflection seismic data Journal of Applied Geophysics, 114, 202 209, doi 10 .1016 j.jappgeo.2015.01.019. Marfurt, K. J., 2006, Robust estimates of reflector dip and azimuth Geophysics, 71, no. 4, P29 P40, doi 10.1190 1 .2213049. Marfurt, K. J., V. Sudhaker, A. Gersztenkorn, K. D. Crawford, and S. E. Nissen, 1999, Coherency calculations in the presence of structural dip Geophysics, 64, 104 111, doi 10.1190 1.1444508. Matos, M. C., P. L. M. Osorio, and P. R. S. Johann, 2007, Unsupervised seismic facies analysis using wavelet transform and self-organizing maps Geophysics, 72, no. 1, P9 P21, doi 10.1190 1.2392789. Partyka, G., J. Gridley, and J. Lopez, 1999, Interpretational applications of spectral decomposition in reservoir characterization The Leading Edge, 18, 353 360, doi 10.1190 1.1438295. Qi, J., B. Zhang, H. Zhou, and K. J. Marfurt, 2014, Attribute expression of fault controlled karst Fort Worth basin, Interpretation May 2019 T475 Downloaded from https pubs.geoscienceworld.org interpretation article-pdf 7 2 T467 4698394 int-2018-0004.1.pdf by Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul user Texas A tutorial Interpretation, 2, no. 3, SF91 SF110, doi 10.1190 INT-2013-0188.1. Roberts, A., 2001, Curvature attributes and their application to 3D interpreted horizons First Break, 19, 85 100, doi 10.1046 j.0263-5046.2001.00142.x. Roden, R., T. Smith, and D. Sacrey, 2015, Geologic pattern recognition from seismic attributes Principal component analysis and self-organizing maps Interpretation, 3, no. 4, SAE59 SAE83, doi 10.1190 INT-20150037.1. Rongchang, L., B. Zhang, and X. Wang, 2017, Patterns classification in assisting seismic-facies analysis 87th Annual International Meeting, SEG, Expanded Abstracts, 2127 2131, doi 10.1190 segam2017-17795000.1. Sun, S., R. Siegfried, and J. Castagna, 2002, Examples of wavelet transform time-frequency analysis in direct hydrocarbon detection 72nd Annual International Meeting, SEG, Expanded Abstracts, 457 460, doi 10 .1190 1.1817281. Wang, Y., 2007, Seismic time-frequency spectral decomposition by matching pursuit Geophysics, 72, no. 1, V13 V20, doi 10.1190 1.2387109. Wright, P., and K. Rodriguez, 2018, Reinterpreting the South Atlantic pre-salt microbialite reservoirs Petrographic, isotopic and seismic evidence for a shallow evaporitic lake depositional model First Break, 36, 71 77. Wright, V. P., and A. J. Barnett, 2017, Critically evaluating the current depositional models for the pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, offshore Brazil Presented at the AAPG SEG International Conference and Exhibition. Xu, R., and D. Wunsch, 2005, Survey of clustering algorithms IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 16, 645 678, doi 10.1109 TNN.2005.845141. Yuan, S., S. Wang, M. Ma, Y. Ji, and L. Deng, 2017, Sparse Bayesian learning-based time-variant deconvolution IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 55, 6182 6194, doi 10.1109 TGRS.2017.2722223. Zhao, T., V. Jayaram, A. Roy, and K. J. Marfurt, 2015, A comparison of classification techniques of seismic facies recognition Interpretation, 3, no. 4, SAE29 SAE58, doi 10.1190 INT-2015-0044.1. Zheng, X., Y. Li, J. Li, and X. Yu, 2007, Reef and shoal reservoir characterization using paleogeomorphology constrained seismic attribute analysis 77th Annual International Meeting, SEG, Expanded Abstracts, 1382 1386, doi 10.1190 1.2792757. Carlos Jesus received B.S. and M.Sc. degrees in geophysics from the Universidade Federal Fluminense, as well as a postgraduate specialization course in seismic stratigraphy interpretation from the Universidade Estadual do Rio de Janeiro. He has 10 years of experience, during which he has worked with seismic acquisition and processing onshore and offshore. Presently, he is a geophysicist at Petrogal Brasil working with seismic processing and reservoir characterization in Brazilian presalt and equatorial margin. Maria Olho Azul received an M.Sc. from the University of Lisbon. She is the development geologist at Petrogal Brasil and has been working for the past 10 years with presalt carbonate reservoirs, focused on reservoir modeling, characterization, and implementation of rock typing workflows. Wagner Moreira Lupinacci received an M.S. 2010 and a Ph.D. 2014 in reservoir and exploration engineering from State North Fluminense University. He joined UFF in 2015 as a professor. His technical expertise includes seismic inversion, reservoir characterization, and seismic facies classification. Leandro Machado received a degree in geology from the State University of Rio de Janeiro, a master s degree 2010 in marine geology and geophysics from the Fluminense Federal University, and a postgraduate degree 2014 in seismostratigraphic interpretation from the State University of Rio de Janeiro. He is Emerson s technical consultant in seismic interpretation and characterization with 12 years of experience in the oil industry. T476 Interpretation May 2019 Downloaded from https pubs.geoscienceworld.org interpretation article-pdf 7 2 T467 4698394 int-2018-0004.1.pdf by Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul user

[END_OF_PAPER]

13 Petersohn, E., R. Morelatto, C. M. A. Batista, and J. C. S. Vital, 2021, The Giant Mero oil field Geological and petrophysical settings of one of the largest pre-salt fields of the Santos Basin, southern Brazil, in Marcio R. Mello, Pinar O. Yilmaz, and Barry J. Katz, eds., The supergiant Lower Cretaceous pre-salt petroleum systems of the Santos Basin, Brazil AAPG Memoir 124, p. 351 374. The Giant Mero Oil Field Geological and Petrophysical Settings of One of the Largest Pre-Salt Fields of the Santos Basin, Southern Brazil E. Petersohn, R. Morelatto, C. M. A. Batista, and J. C. S. Vital National Agency of Petroleum, Natural Gas and Biofuels ANP , Brazil. Av. Rio Branco, 65 Centro, Rio de Janeiro RJ, 20090-003 e-mails epetersohn anp.gov.br rmorelatto anp.gov.br carnemann anp .gov.br jcsvital anp.gov.br ABSTRACT The Mero Field is one of the most recent large oil discoveries in the pre-salt play of Brazil, and its original oil in place OOIP is estimated at 11.94 bboe. It was discovered 10 years ago by the pioneer well 2-ANP-2A-RJS, drilled by Petrobras in partnership with the National Agency of Petroleum, Natural Gas and Biofuels ANP . The Mero Field was part of the Libra Block, awarded in the first Brazilian bidding round under a production sharing agreement to Petrobras operator , Shell, Total, CNOOC, CNPC, and PPSA. Geological and stratigraphic analysis based on public wells drilled in the Mero Field and high-quality 3-D seismic data mapping show wide variation in the facies distribution of microbial carbonate and coquina reservoirs. Thickness variation in coquinas and shale intercalation can be observed in well correlation and are associated with paleo basement highs. Igneous rocks are common in the reservoir. Petrophysical evaluation indicates significant variations in fluid composition between Mero Field and Libra Complex. Although the Mero Field is composed of good-quality oil 29o API , the Libra Complex consists mainly of gas condensate with high carbon dioxide CO2 content, demonstrating that these structures are disconnected. Petrophysical data also indicate that Mero Field is characterized by two compartments, with different oil water contacts OWCs . It can be explained by semipermeable barriers probably because of internal variation in facies distribution. This chapter aims to present a general overview of the geological and petrophysical characteristics of the Mero Field based on data that have just become public. Copyright 2021 by The American Association of Petroleum Geologists. DOI 10.1306 13722325MSB.13.1853 351 352 Petersohn et al. INTRODUCTION The Mero Field is located in the central part of the Santos Basin, southeastern Brazil, about 180 km off the coast of Rio de Janeiro in a water depth of approximately 2,000 m Figure 1 . It was discovered in 2010 by the well 2-ANP-2A-RJS, drilled by Petrobras in partnership with the Brazilian National Agency of Petroleum, Natural Gas and Biofuels ANP . In 2013, the Libra Block was offered in the first bid round executed by the Brazilian government under the new production sharing agreement for the pre-salt areas. In this block a large four-way closure of more than 500 km2 trending northwest southeast was mapped. The 2-ANP-2A well tested the northwest part of the structure and revealed a 327 m oil column in carbonate reservoirs displaying excellent porosity and permeability proprieties. The consortium formed by Petrobras operator , Shell, Total, CNOOC, CNPC, and PPSA won the bid. The Libra Consortium is led by Petrobras with a 40 interest in partnership with Shell 20 , Total 20 , CNPC 10 , and CNOOC Limited 10 . Pre -Sal Petro leo PPSA represents the Brazilian federal government on production sharing agreements. Figure 2 shows the four areas identified in the Libra Block that divided by significant fault zones northwest, central, southeast, and south. The northwest compartment became the Mero Field, whose declaration of commerciality was announced by the consortium on November 30, 2017 Carlotto et al., 2017 . First oil is expected by 2021. The other compartments of the Libra Block are still under evaluation. The isolated part of the structural closure representing the Mero Field, along the western margin of the Libra Complex, is apparent on the base of salt structure map Figures 2, 3 . Figure 1. Campos and Santos basin location map with bathymetric curves and blocks and oil fields currently under concession. The Giant Mero Oil Field Geological and Petrophysical Settings of One of the Largest Pre-Salt Fields of the Santos Basin, Southern Brazil 353 Figure 2. Structural map of the Libra Complex at the top of the reservoir base of salt . LIBRA BLOCK EXPLORATION HISTORY Wells 2-ANP-1-RJS and 2-ANP-2A-RJS, which tested, respectively, the Franco and Libra prospects, were drilled in 2009 and 2010. After discovery, the Franco prospect was renamed as Buzios Field, the largest oil field in Brazil, and a part of Libra became the Mero Field. The aforementioned wells were conceived by the ANP technical team at the time an Inter-ministerial Commission created by the Brazilian federal government was discussing a new regulatory framework for the pre-salt areas. Three new laws were published. Among them was the Law of Onerous Assignment and Petrobras Capitalization Law 12,276 10 , which authorized the government to subscribe to Petrobras joint-stock shares and to pay for them with federal public debt securities. Under this agreement was the assignment of exploration and production rights for Petrobras for the recovery of up to 5 billion barrels of oil equivalent BOE from the pre-salt interval. To ensure Petrobras would obtain 5 billion BOE, ANP realized it would be necessary to drill wells to identify large oil accumulations that could contain such a volume of oil. Therefore, ANP created a working group of geologists who mapped the pre-salt sequence of the Santos Basin to identify possible targets. The group identified two prominent four-way closures that could contain the volume needed to be assigned, and they recommended drilling two wells. The ANP working group worked together with Petrobras because the state-owned oil company would be operationally responsible for the drilling of these wells. Franco was the first prospect to be drilled, followed by Libra. The well results and the studies conducted by the ANP technical team indicated, at the time, that the Franco prospect Buzios Field would have 22 billion barrels of oil in place, and, therefore, the assignment of only the Franco Block would be sufficient for the Petrobras capitalization process. The technical evaluation of the ANP team was also corroborated by Gaffney, Cline Associates GCA , a 354 Petersohn et al. Figure 3. Structural map of the Mero Field at the top of the reservoir base of salt . global oil and gas consultant hired by the ANP to audit and evaluate 10 prospects in the pre-salt play of the Santos Basin that could be the subject of assignment to Petrobras. According to the GCA report published in 2010 GCA, 2010 , the OOIP for the Franco discovery ranged from a low estimate of 14.64 billion bbl to a high estimate of 29.29 billion bbl, with a best estimate of 21.31 billion bbl. Currently, considering all subsequent exploration efforts executed in the past 10 years, OOIP for the Buzios Field is 30 billion bbl. The OOIP for the Libra prospect, estimated by GCA, ranged from a low estimate of 16.32 billion bbl to a high estimate of 52.49 billion bbl with a best estimate of 31.49 billion bbl. However, because of the exploration risk of drilling of a single well, the Brazilian federal government decided to grant Petrobras rights under six blocks located in the pre-salt area Franco, Florim, Nordeste de Tupi, Sul de Tupi, Sul de Guara , and Entorno de Iara . Franco became the Buzios Field Entorno de Iara was renamed the Berbigao, Sururu, and Atapu fields. Florin became the Itapu Field, Nordeste de Tupi converted to the Sepia Field, Sul de Guara became the Sul of Sapinhoa Field, and Sul de Tupi is the Sul of Lula Field. Therefore, it was not necessary to include the Libra Block in the onerous assignment agreement with Petrobras anymore. Consequently, the Libra Block could be included in the first bid round under production sharing contracts, inaugurating the new regime in Brazil. Well 2-ANP-2A-RJS was in the northwest flank 250 m below the apex of the structure. At the time, the Libra Block was partially covered by time-migrated 3-D seismic 0258SPEC BS 4 PSTM survey and fully The Giant Mero Oil Field Geological and Petrophysical Settings of One of the Largest Pre-Salt Fields of the Santos Basin, Southern Brazil 355 covered by 2-D depth-migrated seismic R 0258 2D SPEC PSDM BMS survey . Because 3-D seismic coverage was mandatory to propose the well location, the well was placed in the northwest part of the structure, which, at the time, represented the only area covered by such data. Within this area, a mound-type feature, interpreted as carbonate buildup, was selected as the target to be drilled. The well drilled 333.50 m of Aptian reservoir rocks gross with 275 m of net pay. The OWC was found at 5,702 m depth. After the signing of the contract, which took place on December 2, 2013, a significant set of exploration activities were carried out in the Libra Block. It has been covered by a high-quality 3-D seismic survey, and currently, there are 15 wells drilled in the block. PRE-SALT PLAY AND PETROLEUM SYSTEMS The pre-salt petroleum system source rocks are the shales from Itapema Formation with accumulation in traps within the carbonate reservoirs from Barra Velha and Itapema formations Barremian Aptian capped by Ariri Formation evaporites. Itapema Formation depositional environment is interpreted as fresh-to-brackish lacustrine environment during the B arremian Aptian age Sabato-Ceraldi and Green, 2016 . Geochemical analysis performed on oil samples from selected wells along the Santos Basin corroborates this depositional origin. Pre-salt reservoirs are generally composed of carbonate rocks including coquinas and or microbialites. Microbial carbonates occur both in the sag post-rift and upper rift synrift sections these carbonates may be interspersed with coquina deposits in the Itapema Formation Neobarremian to E oaptian . Those coquinas are calcirudites that consist of shell fragments and are commonly dolomitized or s ilicified. The seal for the pre-salt play is the extensive salt deposit from Ariri Formation. The main migration pathways are the vertical faults from the rift phase. METHODS The geological, stratigraphic, and petrophysical analysis of the Mero Field was performed using public exploration wells listed in Table 1 and illustrated in Figure 4. Seismic mapping of the main regional markers was performed with high-quality 3-D seismic data from R0264 PULSAR survey. The description of the chrono- and lithostratigraphic units follows the division proposed by Moreira et al. 2007 . Well Location 2-ANP-2A-RJS Mero Central 3-BRSA-1255-RJS Mero Central 3-BRSA-1267A-RJS Libra Central 3-BRSA-1305A-RJS Mero Central 3-BRSA-1310-RJS Saddle between Mero and Libra 3-BRSA-1322-RJS Mero North 3-BRSA-1339A-RJS Mero Central 3-BRSA-1342A-RJS Mero Central 3-BRSA-1343-RJS Mero Central 3-BRSA-1345-RJS Mero South 4-BRSA-1346-RJS Libra Southeast Table 1. Well Data Set for the Geological and Petrophysical Analysis of the Mero Field. This List Includes All Public Wells Available at the Time of Publication of This Work. MERO FIELD STRUCTURAL AND STRATIGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION The economic basement in the Mero Field is composed of igneous rocks as described in several wells that show magmatic rocks at the base of the sedimentary section. These igneous rocks are basalts, probably extruded in a subaqueous environment, belonging to the Hauterivian K20 K34 sequences. Lithostratigraphically, they are grouped into the Camboriu Formation. Seismic data identify high-amplitude reflectors with tabular geometries and high dip, bounded by rift faults in rotated blocks. It seems that the lower limit of this seismic facies is an unconformity, which separates economic from acoustic basement. The acoustic basement is characterized by opaque noncoherent reflectors. It might represent the Neoproterozoic metavolcanic- sedimentary complex of the Ribeira Belt Moreira et al., 2007 . The Barremian K36 sequence overlays the economic basement, informally described in the Santos Basin as a talc-stevensite bearing sequence and grouped in the Pic arras Formation. In the Mero Field, the K36 sequence was sampled only by well 3-BRSA-1339A-RJS, where around 70 m of silt-predominant sedimentary rocks have been described, interspersed with limestone lenses. Seismic data analysis shows that these rocks occur locally, directly over the acoustic basement. These seismic facies are thin and difficult to track, as can be seen on Figure 5. The Barremian Aptian K38 sequence unconformably overlies the Pic arras Formation K36 sequence . In the Santos Basin, the K38 sequence is informally west east solid line Figures 6, 11 correlation panels. Figure 4. Mero and the Libra field block location map displaying public exploration wells. It also shows north south dotted line see Figures 5, 10 and 356 Petersohn et al. seismic facies characterized by laterally continuous flat-parallel reflectors, low frequency, and high negative amplitude. Figure 5. Arbitrary seismic line through the Mero Field. It is noticeable a prominent basement high and a carbonate platform in the central part, which shows The Giant Mero Oil Field Geological and Petrophysical Settings of One of the Largest Pre-Salt Fields of the Santos Basin, Southern Brazil 357 358 Petersohn et al. described as a coquinas sequence and grouped into the Itapema Formation. The base of this sequence is characterized by layers of shale, as sampled by several wells. These shales are represented by reflectors of high negative amplitude and extensive lateral continuity in seismic data, allowing correlation along the central part of Mero Field Figures 6, 7 . The well 3- BRSA-1339A-RJS, which was drilled in the western part of the Mero Field, has identified a large amount of fine-grained sedimentary rocks interspersed with coquinas, whose layers can reach thickness of up to 100 m. In the central part of the Mero Field, layers of coquina can reach thicknesses of up to 400 m in the well 2-ANP-2A-RJS, where only a few of other interlayered rocks occur. Coquina reservoirs exhibit chaotic-to- progradational seismic facies and mound geometries. These mounds exhibit internal reflectors characterized by low amplitudes and minimal lateral continuity and are arranged as clinoforms, showing a progradational pattern with directions ranging from northeast to northwest Figure 8 . These clinoforms are cut by a positive horizontal reflector, discordant with the local stratigraphy and coincident with the OWC identified in well 2-ANP-2A-RJS. The positive discordant reflector was interpreted as a flat spot, and it is possible to track it throughout most of central part. This extraordinary coquina thickness was deposited in a wide platform, probably in shallow-water environment, developed over gently dipping northern and western flanks of a prominent basement high, which occur in the central and eastern parts of the Mero Field Figure 9 . The top of the coquina onlaps against the basement in seismic data. Coquinas also occur in the eastern part of the Mero Field. However, they show some differences in relation to those described on the northern and western flanks. The well 3-BRSA-1350-RJS was drilled in the eastern part of the Mero Field, and it identified a thinner coquina layer. In the basal section of this well, silicified limestones interlayered with thin coquina prevail. Also, there are other carbonatic lithotypes, s ilexite and undifferentiated igneous rocks. The top of this unit is characterized by silicified carbonates interlayered with shales and igneous rocks absent of coquinas. Conversely, coquinas have not been identified in wells 3-BRSA1322-RJS and 3-BRSA-1345-RJS, which were drilled respectively at the northern and southern parts of the Mero Field Figure 10 . The top of the K38 sequence is characterized by an increase in gamma-ray readings, as demonstrated by the wells 2-ANP-2A-RJS, 3-BRSA-1255-RJS, 3- B RSA-1342A-RJS, and 3-BRSA-1343-RJS. On top of that, in well 2-ANP-2A-RJS there is also a drop in the resistivity, sonic, and density readings Figure 11 . Overlying the K38 sequence occur the K44, K46, and K48 sequences of the Aptian Barra Velha Formation. The last two sequences are difficult to distinguish, and they will be treated together as a single K46 K48 sequence. Grainstones composed of pelecypod shell fragments, reworked from the underlying coquinas, are described in the basal part of the K44 sequence. The younger parts of this sequence, as well as the K46 K48 sequence, are composed mainly by the intercalation of centimetric to metric layers of spherulites, stromatolites, and laminites Terra et al., 2010 . Intercalation of grainstones composed of reworked fragments of spherulites and stromatolites is especially common in wells located on the distal western platform and is less common in other areas. In wells drilled in the central eastern part of the Mero Field, in addition to the lithotypes described earlier, submetric intercalations of shales can be observed. These carbonate high-frequency cyclothems exhibit complex stratigraphic framework, and each in situ facies may be deposited in different phases of fluctuations in the paleolake level, in response to changes in the energy level Sabato-Ceraldi and Green, 2016 Saller et al., 2016 , as well to the paleolake geochemistry Wright and Barnett, 2015 Farias et al., 2019 Wright and Barnett, 2020 . In situ spherulites are common in the wells drilled at the apex of the Mero Field, whereas on the western flank of the field, they appear to occur only as reworked fragments or are not described at all in the wells located in distal positions. In situ spherulites are uncommon in the southern and northern parts of the Mero Field. In situ stromatolites including shrubs, commonly subcentimeter, are described in wells located in the distal western flank, as well as in the northern part of the structure. Laminites are characterized by compositional variation, with intercalating submillimeter layers composed of nodules, bioclasts, and siliciclastic grains. They are more common in the wells located in the western platform and in the basal section of the central platform wells but can also be observed in the southern and northern parts of the field. It is interesting to note that these laminites are practically absent at the structural apex. Seismic data analysis indicates variations in the occurrence of the K46 K48 sequence in the Mero Field. In the central part of Mero Field, the K46 K48 sequence ranges in thicknesses from 100 to 300 m. It is characterized by continuous flat-parallel reflectors, low frequency, and high negative amplitude and is interpreted as a carbonate platform. Figure 6. Arbitrary seismic line through the Mero Field and the Libra Block. The Giant Mero Oil Field Geological and Petrophysical Settings of One of the Largest Pre-Salt Fields of the Santos Basin, Southern Brazil 359 Figure 7. Arbitrary seismic line through the Mero Field. A flat spot is coincident to the OWC. 360 Petersohn et al. The Giant Mero Oil Field Geological and Petrophysical Settings of One of the Largest Pre-Salt Fields of the Santos Basin, Southern Brazil 361 Figure 8. Arbitrary seismic line through the well 2-ANP-2A-RJS, exhibiting detailed view of a coquinas mound in the Mero Field. The K46 K48 sequence thickness can reach up to 400 m in the northern and southern parts. Intense igneous intercalation of intrusive and volcanic rocks is described in this sequence, especially in the basal part, possibly related to the Libra Transfer Zone Zhao et al., 2019 . These igneous rocks are characterized by high-amplitude reflectors in seismic data. A mound with chaotic internal reflections was identified overlying those seismic facies this mound is very similar to the one at the southern end of the field. This mound was interpreted as a buildup, as seen in Figure 12. As stated earlier, intrusive igneous rocks occur in the Mero reservoir and are easily identified in seismic as high-amplitude reflectors. The wells drilled in this region demonstrate that these rocks can reach thickness of up to 70 m at its apex. The occurrence of at least four magmatic events in this area is recognized, and multiphase pervasive hydrothermal alteration related to those events is observed in the Libra Block, generally tightening the reservoir Ren et al., 2019 . Wells drilled in the Libra Block exhibit a similar stratigraphy compared to the Mero Field. Well 3- BRSA-1310-RJS is located in a saddle between the Mero Field and the Libra Complex and identified only K44, K46, and K48 sequences interlayered with igneous rocks. Carbonates are mostly recrystallized, possibly because of thermal effects of adjacent igneous rocks, and therefore are considered as nonreservoir. Well 4-BRSA-1346-RJS was drilled on the flank of the easternmost structure of the Libra Complex. It identified the same sequences with distal facies characteristic of deeper water, such as mudstones and shales, and fewer occurrences of igneous rocks. Finally, well 3- BRSA-1267A-RJS was drilled near the apex of Libra s central structure. It identified the K44, K46, and K48 sequences with intense interleaving of igneous rocks, especially in the basal part. It also identified the K38 sequence, composed of coquinas interspersed with mudstone beds and a predominance of igneous rocks. The structure is sealed by the K50 sequence composed of evaporites from Aptian Ariri Formation. The overlying salt layer currently reaches thicknesses ranging from hundreds of meters to over 1 km, forming a very efficient seal. Figure 9. Structural map of the Mero Field at the top of basement. 362 Petersohn et al. the K38 sequence does not occur. In the wells on the western flank, this sequence exhibits greater shale intercalation. At the top of the structure, there is intrusive rock. Figure 10. Correlation panel of public exploration wells, with approximate north south orientation. At the southern and northern parts, it is noticeable that The Giant Mero Oil Field Geological and Petrophysical Settings of One of the Largest Pre-Salt Fields of the Santos Basin, Southern Brazil 363 Field and the Libra Block. Figure 11. Correlation panel of public exploration wells, with approximate west east orientation. Note a wide sequence variation that occurs from the Mero 364 Petersohn et al. The Giant Mero Oil Field Geological and Petrophysical Settings of One of the Largest Pre-Salt Fields of the Santos Basin, Southern Brazil 365 Figure 12. Arbitrary seismic line crossing well 3-BRSA-1345-RJS. The chaotic seismic facies in blue are interpreted as carbonate buildup. PETROPHYSICAL ANALYSIS To better understand well logs in the Mero Field, identifying the fluid contacts was considered an important first step. The primary indicator in this case was the pressure depth relationship observed from wireline formation tests. Two separate linear gradients were observed in the data, and the intercept between the fluid gradients of oil and water zones revealed the position of the free water level FWL Jahn et al., 2008 . This fluid contact was confirmed by inflection of the true resistivity profile of the formation. Both sources of information provide clear, reliable, and good-quality data for the wells analyzed in the Mero Field and generally indicate a consistent depth for the contact in each well. For this reason, the depth of the FWL was considered identical with that of the OWC. This is common in the case of permeable reservoirs with little capillary pressure close to the contact Morton-Thompson and Woods, 1993 Jahn 366 Petersohn et al. et al., 2008 and agrees well with the permeability data of the analyzed wells. The oil pressure gradient observed in all wells is indiscernible within measurement uncertainty and linear regression adjustments with typical inclination of 0.074 kgf cm2 m. Two distinct OWCs were clearly identified, indicating at least two separate hydrocarbon compartments Figure 13 . A structurally higher OWC occurs toward north end of the field at 5,705.8 m SSTVD , and a lower OWC occurs to the south at 5,766 m SSTVD . OWCs in two wells cannot be observed because of the presence of igneous rocks at the base of the reservoir, at a structural level to obscure measurement of the OWC. Well 3-BRSA-1267A-RJS sampled gas condensate in the central sector of the Libra Complex with a CO2 concentration of 67 . In addition to the difference in fluid composition compared to the Mero Field, the pressure gradient of the gas zone of 3-BRSA-1267ARJS does not intersect at any point with the Mero oil gradient. This indicates that the Mero Field and Libra are separated. It was not possible to identify the OWC position in the central sector of Libra because of the lack of data in the appraisal well caused by igneous intrusions at the base of the reservoir. Because the OWC position was identified in each well, gross pay of all wells was calculated with a mean and standard deviation of 380.5 84.5 m. In the net pay estimation, measurement of effective porosity by nuclear magnetic resonance NMR was used, excluding well 3-BRSA-1305A-RJS, which did not have this log. In this well porosity was calculated by density profile Asquith and Krygowski, 2006 . The cutoff factor of 6 for porosity was estimated by the correlation between porosity and permeability, given a m inimum permeability of approximately 3 mD Figure 14 . Permeability was obtained from the NMR logs using the Timur-Coates relationship Coates et al., 2001 , a llowing average permeability per well to be calculated. The water saturation was estimated using Archie s equation Archie, 1942 with the true resistivity of the formation from the well logs and porosity from NMR logs. The saturation exponent was assumed as 2.0 Asquith and Krygowski, 2006 . As is typical for carbonates Carothers, 1968 , the tortuosity factor was assumed as 0.85 and the cementation exponent as 2.14. From fluid samples of 2-ANP-2A-RJS at 5,553.5, 5,613.5, and 5,624.3 m MD , the formation water equivalent salinity was measured at 253,514 ppm. This gives a formation water resistivity of approximately 0.015 ohm m, at a formation temperature of 92oC Schlumberger, 2009 . This information was corroborated by a linear least squares regression on log log domain of true resistivity versus porosity at the water zone of 2-ANP-2A-RJS Figure 15 . Solving this linear model with the tortuosity factor and cementation exponent given earlier gives a formation water Figure 13. The gas zone gradient for the central part of Libra left and the oil and water zone gradient for the lower and upper OWC identified in the two compartments of the Mero Field right . The gas gradient of central Libra is compared to the identical oil zone gradient for the two compartments, showing that this structure is separated from Mero Field. The Giant Mero Oil Field Geological and Petrophysical Settings of One of the Largest Pre-Salt Fields of the Santos Basin, Southern Brazil 367 Figure 14. Cross-plot of porosity versus permeability for the public wells of Mero illustrating that a 6 porosity cutoff equals a minimum permeability of approximately 3 mD. The black line shows the linear squares regression for the data set. Figure 15. Pickett plot Pickett, 1973 with a linear least squares regression of deep resistivity and porosity data for the water zone of 2-ANP-2A-RJS. 368 Petersohn et al. Figure 16. Histogram and kernel density estimation of net pay and gross pay distribution and net-to-gross distribution from Mero Field public wells. The lower boxplot illustrates the main properties of each distribution with red diamonds at the distribution mean. resistivity of 0.0143 ohm m, which is compatible with the fluid sample analysis. The cutoff factor applied for water saturation was 50 because this separates an accumulation carrying hydrocarbons from a mostly water-saturated reservoir. The net pay of all public wells was calculated with a mean and standard deviation of 231.2 83.4 m. Consequently, a net-to-gross with a mean and standard deviation of 56.7 21.0 was obtained. As illustrated in Figure 16, although most wells have a net to gross greater than 60 , there are three wells with much lower values reaching almost 20 in the worst case. This difference represents a variation of facies throughout the field. To better illustrate the porosity water saturation relationships, a more detailed analysis of the variation in the data was performed. As illustrated in Figure 17, porosity distribution of the oil-saturated zone in each well is approximately lognormal. In addition, these distributions are compatible between wells. The composition of all porosity measurements is approximately lognormal, and the mean and standard deviation observed are 10.97 3.61 . The same analysis was performed for water saturation Figure 18 . Water saturation demonstrates a clear lognormality, especially for aggregate distribution the mean and standard deviation are 7.22 6.97 . These results agree well with literature on the prevalence of lognormal distributions for oil-related parameters. Finally, an example of a typical petrophysical analysis is illustrated for well 3-BRSA-1345-RJS Figure 19 . This example shows the excellent quality of lower OWC determination by static pressure and resistivity data, as well as illustrating the cutoffs and behavior typical of porosity, resistivity, and estimated water saturation logs. Table 2 shows the summary of petrophysical properties for the public wells of the Mero Field. Fluid properties extracted from well tests performed in wells were included. CONCLUSIONS The facies variation identified in the Mero Field is reflected in the petrophysical properties described. Although the Libra Complex represents a large fourway closure, there are significant variations in the composition of fluids present in the wells of Mero and that observed in the Libra Block. Well orosity distributions of each well, averages indicated by red diamonds. Histogram and kernel density estimation of aggregate distribution using all p samples of each individual distribution is shown in the figure. Black line shows the adjustment of a lognormal distribution by best fit to the data. Figure 17. Porosity distribution above the cutoff factor of 6 of the oil-saturated reservoir zone of the Mero Field public wells. Boxplots illustrate the The Giant Mero Oil Field Geological and Petrophysical Settings of One of the Largest Pre-Salt Fields of the Santos Basin, Southern Brazil 369 3-BRSA-1310-RJS, drilled between the Mero and Libra structures, identified K44, K46, and K48 sequences without reservoir conditions, representing the potential for an impermeable barrier between the structures. Indisputably, the fluid sampled and the pressure gradient of well 3-BRSA-1267A-RJS, drilled at the structural peak of the central part of the Libra Complex, are very distinct from Mero, consisting mainly of gas condensate with high CO2 public wells. Boxplots illustrate the water saturation distributions of each well, averages indicated by red diamonds. Histogram and kernel density estimation of aggregate distribution using all samples of each individual distribution is shown in the figure. Black line represents the adjustment of a lognormal distribution by best fit to the data. Petersohn et al. Figure 18. Distribution of water saturation below the cutoff factor of 50 of the oil-saturated reservoir zone of the Mero Field 370 content. This demonstrates that these structures are indeed distinct. The Mero Field is individually compartmentalized into at least two parts. According to the petrophysical analysis, the gradient of the oil zone is the same for both compartments, and the two identified contacts are flat. These factors can be explained by the presence of semipermeable barriers compartmentalizing a reservoir that would otherwise be more homogeneous effective porosity free fluid, adimensional , intervals considered as pay, true resistivity formation, water saturation by Archie, and static pressure are shown. The Barra Velha marker marks the top of the reservoir, and the OWC marker is the OWC. Figure 19. Petrophysical analysis of well 3-BRSA-1345-RJS. From left to right, the depth track, the lithology, gamma-ray profile with environmental correction, The Giant Mero Oil Field Geological and Petrophysical Settings of One of the Largest Pre-Salt Fields of the Santos Basin, Southern Brazil 371 372 Petersohn et al. Yo oAPI GOR m3 m3 CO2 H2S ppm 269.3 416.3 28 420 25 35 15 6.1 5.9 87.1 149.7 30 360 - - 11.5 5.1 13.8 10.2 - 28 374 45 7 73 12.9 4.7 7.4 6.8 549.2 974.6 26 426 - - 491.3 67 11.8 4.3 10.1 9.7 401.8 1167 27 401 - - 3-BRSA-1342A-RJS 257.2 358.6 71.7 11.4 3.3 6.7 5.7 159 232.3 28 410 46 - 3-BRSA-1343-RJS 164.8 257.2 64.1 10 2.7 6.1 6.6 76.9 126.3 28 417 5 - 3-BRSA-1345-RJS 368.4 407.6 90.4 11.2 3.1 6.9 5.6 220.8 439.9 28 426 18 - 3-BRSA-1350-RJS 131.6 522.2 25.2 9.8 2.7 7.3 6.5 194.2 293.3 27 438 16 - Well Net Pay m Gross Net Gross Pay m m Sw K mD 2-ANP-2A-RJS 275.8 334 82.6 12.4 3.5 4.7 5 3-BRSA-1255-RJS 173 335.9 51.5 10.1 2.8 3-BRSA-1305A-RJS 148.2 399.2 37.1 3-BRSA-1322-RJS 232.4 318.4 3-BRSA-1339A-RJS 329.2 Table 2. Summary of Petrophysical and Fluid Properties for the Mero Field Public Wells. Fluid Properties Were Extracted from Tests Performed in Wells Other Properties Are the Result of the Analysis of the Present Study. Morton-Thompson and Woods, 1993 . These barriers are probably caused by an internal variation of facies. This hypothesis is supported by significant degrading of reservoir conditions observed in well 3-BRSA-1310RJS, which could represent the impermeable barrier separating the reservoirs of the Mero Field from the central structure of the Libra Complex. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors are thankful to ANP for the opportunity to publish this study. REFERENCES CITED Archie, G. E., 1942, The electrical resistivity log as an aid in determining some reservoir characteristics Transactions of American Institute of Mining Metallurgical Engineers, Dallas, Texas, v. 146, no. 01, SPE 942054-G, DOI 10.2118 942054-G. Asquith, G., and D. Krygowski, 2006, Basic well log a nalysis AAPG Methods in Exploration 16, 2nd ed., 244 p. Carlotto, M. A., R. C. Baptista da Silva, A. A. Yamato, W. L. Trindade, J. L. Pinheiro Moreira, R. A. Rosa Fernandes, O. J. S. Ribeiro, W. P. Gouveia Jr., J. P. Carminati, D. Qicai, Z. Junfeng, A. C. da Silva-Telles Jr., 2017, Libra A newborn giant in the Brazilian, in R. K. Merril and C. A. S ternbach, eds., Giant fields of the decade 2000 2010 AAPG Memoir 113, p. 165 176. Carothers, J. E., 1968, A statistical study of the formation factor relation to porosity The Log Analyst, v. 9, p. 38 52. Coates, G. R., L. Xiao, and M. G. Prammer, 2001, NMR logging Principles and applications, 1st ed. Halliburton Energy Services Publications H02308, Houston, Texas, Gulf Professional Publishing, 234 p. Farias, F., P. Szatmari, A. M. Bahniuk, and A. B. Franc a, 2019, April 1, Evaporitic carbonates in the pre-salt of Santos Basin genesis and tectonic implications Marine and Petroleum Geology, v. 105, p. 251 272. GCA, 2010, Review and evaluation of ten selected discoveries and prospects in the pre-salt play of the deepwater Santos Basin, Brazil ANP, Gaffney, Cline Associates, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, GCA, CG JW RLG C1820 GCABA , 1914. Jahn, F., M. Cook, and M. Graham, 2008, Hydrocarbon exploration and production, 2nd ed. Elsevier Science, Amsterdan, v. 55, 456 p. Moreira, J. L., C. V. Madeira, J. A. Gil, and M. A. Machado, 2007, Bacia de Santos Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, v. 15, p. 531 549. Morton-Thompson, D., and A. M. Woods, 1993, Development geology reference manual AAPG Methods in Exploration 10 565 p. Pickett, G. R., 1973, Pattern recognition as a means of formation evaluation The Log Analyst, v. 14, no. 4, p. 3 11. Ren, K., M. J. Oliveira, J. Zhao, J. Zhao, L. C. Oliveira, C. C. Rancan, I. O. Carmo, and Q. Deng 2019, Using wireline The Giant Mero Oil Field Geological and Petrophysical Settings of One of the Largest Pre-Salt Fields of the Santos Basin, Southern Brazil 373 logging and thin sections to identify igneous c ontact metamorphism and hydrothermal influence on presalt l imestone reservoirs in Libra Block, Santos Basin Offshore Technology Conference, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, DOI 10.4043 29691-ms. Sabato-Ceraldi, T., and D. Green, 2016, Evolution of the South Atlantic lacustrine deposits in response to Early Cretaceous rifting, subsidence and lake hydrology London, Geological Society Special Publication 438, DOI 10.1144 SP438.10. Saller, A., S. Rushton, L. Buambua, K. Inman, R. McNeil, and J. A. Dickson, 2016, Presalt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola AAPG Bulletin, v. 100 107, p. 1135 1164. S c h l u m b e r g e r, 2 0 0 9 , L o g i n t e r p r e t a t i o n c h a r t s Schlumberger, Identifier 2009 Edition Log Interpretation Charts, 148 p. Terra, G. J., A. R. Spadini, A. B. Franc a, C. L. Somba, E. E. Zambonato, L. C. Juschaks, and L. M. Arienti, et al., 2010, Classificac a o de rochas carbona ticas aplica vel a s bacias sedimentares brasileiras Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, v. 18, p. 9 29. Wright, V. P., and A. J. Barnett, 2015, July 2, An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates London, Geological Society, Abstract, DOI 10.1144 SP418.3. Wright, V. P., and A. J. Barnett, 2020, The textural evolution and ghost matrices of the Cretaceous Barra Velha Formation carbonates from the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil Facies, v. 1, p. 66 67. Zhao, J., M. J. Oliveira, J. Zhao, K. Ren, L. C. Oliveira, I. d. Carmo, C. C. Rancan, and Q. Deng, 2019, Fault activity and its influences on distribution of igneous rocks in Libra Block, Santos Basin Semi-quantitative to quantitative assessment of fault activity based on high-resolution 3D seismic data Offshore Conference Technology, OTC 29691-MS, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, DOI 10.4043 29691-ms.

[END_OF_PAPER]

Petroleum potential of the first production sharing open acreage round Eliane Petersohn 1 Petroleum Geologist 1 Brazilian National Agency of Petroleum, Natural Gas and Biofuels 1 Stanford University 3 rd EAGE Conference on Pre-salt Reservoir Rio de Janeiro November 23 rd , 2022 Outline Brazil s E P Overview The Pre-salt Province Outline Petroleum Potential of the 1st Production Sharing Open Acreage Round Takeaways 1 Brazil s E P Overview Brazil s the largest offshore marked worldwide Area under concession 185,000 km2 239 Blocks 278 Fields Production Oct, 2022 Oil 3,243 million bbl d Natural Gas 148 million m3 d Proved Reserves Dec, 2021 Oil 13.2 billion bbl Natural Gas 378 billion m3 8th World s largest oil producer and Latin America s largest producer BP Statistical Review, 2021 4.179 million boe d 3.243 million bbl d 3,500,000 3,000,000 2.999 million boe d 2.359 million bbl d Barrels of Oil d 2,5 2,500,000 2,000,000 1,5 1,500,000 1,0 1,000,000 0,5 500,000 0,0 0 Total Pre-salt Post-salt Onshore ANP s dynamic E P Panel, access on November 20th, 2022 2 The Pre-salt Province The Pre-salt play one of the hottest oil play worldwide Campos Basin Santos Basin Pre-salt Polygon Field Block under concession Pre-salt current state Campos Basin Itaipu Wahoo 33 blocks under concession Area 27,000 km2 Production 750,000 bbl dia 60 fields Gavea Seat Pao de Acucar Gato do Mato Libra Sagitario Jupiter Santos Basin 27 blocks under concession Area 23,000 km2 Production 2.310 million bbl dia 37 fields Pre-salt polygon Filed Block under concession Discovery assessment plan Majors, supermajors and independent oil companies are exploring the pre-salt The majority of the discovered resources are yet to be produced 1000 900 887 800 700 bbl d 600 535 500 400 300 200 100 182 146 127 83 65 57 54 0 52 44 26 20 20 13 11 Several oilfields are still under development or in the early stages of production Illustration adapted from Petrobras The pre-salt production has dramatically increased since the first oil 3.00 2.7 2.85 Million barrels of Equivalent Oil day 2.55 2.50 2.18 average pre-salt production through the years 2.00 1.79 1.6 1.50 1.27 948 1.00 491 0.50 370 200 169 2011 2012 50 0.00 2008 2009 2010 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 three first quarters The pre-salt production is derived from 130 wells adapted from Petrobras The Pre-salt wells are undoubtedly the most productive offshore wells globally 60,000.00 50,000.00 bbl d 40,000.00 30,000.00 20,000.00 10,000.00 0.00 well average production 32,000 bbl d Illustration adapted from Petrobras Block C-M-346 Dois Irmaos Naru Block C-M-657 Alto de Cabo Frio Central Urissane Block C-M-411 Uirapuru The Pre-salt still has an extraordinary remaining potential to be unlocked Curac ao Aram Block Opal Bloco C-M-789 Tres Marias Block Block under concession Pre-salt Polygon Field Recent discoveries Extraordinary potential to be unlocked IHS has estimated that the Pre-salt play has potential for discoveries of more than 50 billion barrels of oil equivalent HIS Markit YTF resource estimates 3 Petroleum potential of the 1st production sharing round Turmalina Norte de Brava Agua Marinha Itaimbezinho Jade Sudoeste de Sagitario Cruzeiro do Sul Agata Esmeralda Tupinamba Bumerangue 11 offshore blocks in the prolific Pre-salt Province are up for offer in the Open Acreage Round Tailored for any company profile Block on offer Pre-salt Polygon Offshore basin Onshore basin Basement Map of the Top of the Pre-salt Reservoir Broader view of the Sudoeste de Sagitario Block Bacalhau Field Block Sudoeste de Sagitario Sagitario Discovery Courtesy PGS - R0014 SANTOS III PSDM AKA SANTOS VISION 10 km Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 Normal faults play a highly crucial role in migration and in the structural style Bacalhau Field Block Sudoeste de Sagitario Sagitario Discovery Courtesy PGS - R0014 SANTOS III PSDM AKA SANTOS VISION 10 km Fault Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 The basement highs influence migration pathways and form traps Bacalhau Field Block Sudoeste de Sagitario Sagitario Discovery Courtesy PGS - R0014 SANTOS III PSDM AKA SANTOS VISION 10 km Fault Basement Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 Fine sediments deposited in the lacustrine environment gave rise to the prolific source rock in the Santos Basin Bacalhau Field Block Sudoeste de Sagitario Sagitario Discovery Courtesy PGS - R0014 SANTOS III PSDM AKA SANTOS VISION 10 km Fault Basement Rift Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 Pre-salt carbonate reservoirs thick production zones associated with high porosity and permeability proprieties Bacalhau Field Block Sudoeste de Sagitario Sagitario Discovery Courtesy PGS - R0014 SANTOS III PSDM AKA SANTOS VISION 10 km Fault Basement Rift Carbonate reservoir Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 Thick layers of salt act as the perfect seal Bacalhau Field Block Sudoeste de Sagitario Sagitario Discovery Courtesy PGS - R0014 SANTOS III PSDM AKA SANTOS VISION 10 km Fault Basement Rift Carbonate reservoir Salt Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 A detailed view of the Sudoeste de Sagitario Block 3-BRSA-1370-SPS Block Sudoeste de Sagita rio Discoverer well S-M-623 Sud. Sagit. Depth km 4 6 8 Courtesy PGS - R0014 SANTOS III PSDM AKA SANTOS VISION Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 Potential reservoirs in a four-way closure structure sealed by a thick layer of salt Block Sudoeste de Sagita rio S-M-623 Sud. Sagit. Depth km 4 6 8 0 2.5 km Courtesy PGS - R0014 SANTOS III PSDM AKA SANTOS VISION Salt Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 3-ESSO-3-SPS Tupinamba Block 3-ESSO-5-SPS Positioned in the main pre-salt trend Gigantic four-way closure structure Wells were drilled down dip closest well 25 km Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 Tupinamba Block very prominent structural basement high Four-way closure 4,000 5,000 Depth m 3,000 Tupinamba Block 5 km R0264 SANTOS CONSTELLATION Courtesy CGG Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 Deep faults and large-displacement 4,000 5,000 Depth m 3,000 Tupinamba Block 5 km R0264 SANTOS CONSTELLATION Courtesy CGG Fault Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 Seismic processing improvement is needed to enhance the subsalt imaging 4,000 5,000 Depth m 3,000 Tupinamba Block 5 km R0264 SANTOS CONSTELLATION Courtesy CGG Fault Basement Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 Salt layer seems to be thick enough to seal the reservoir 4,000 5,000 Depth m 3,000 Tupinamba Block 5 km R0264 SANTOS CONSTELLATION Courtesy CGG Fault Basement Salt Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 It s a huge structure and it has potential for a giant oil discovery 4,000 5,000 Depth m 3,000 Tupinamba Block 5 km R0264 SANTOS CONSTELLATION Courtesy CGG Fault Basement Salt Carbonate reservoir Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 Bumerangue Block Positioned in the main pre-salt trend Several four-way closure structures Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 Broader view of the Bumerangue Block 4,000 6,000 8,000 10,000 Depth km 2,000 Bumerangue Block 10 R0264 SANTOS CONSTELLATION Courtesy CGG Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 Several four-way closure structures sealed by thick layers of salt Reservoir facies similar to the world-class pre-salt fields 4,000 6,000 8,000 10,000 Depth km 2,000 Bumerangue Block 10 R0264 SANTOS CONSTELLATION Courtesy CGG Fault Basement Salt Carbonate reservoir Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 Esmeralda Block Three-way closure structure 1-BRSA-757-SPS Fault-dependent closure Volume in place 6 billion barrels Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 Broader view of the Esmeralda Block -6,000 Depth m -4,000 Esmeralda Block R0264 SANTOS CONSTELLATION Courtesy CGG Courtesy CGG - R0264 SANTOS CONSTELLATION Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 Broader view of the Esmeralda Block -6,000 Depth m -4,000 Esmeralda Block R0264 SANTOS CONSTELLATION Courtesy CGG Fault Basement Salt Carbonate reservoir Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 Broader view of the Agata Block Agata Block 6,000 Sal 8,000 Depth km 4,000 2,000 3-BRSA-1183-RJS R0264 SANTOS CONSTELLATION Courtesy CGG Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 Prominent basement high, four-way closure and potential for gigantic carbonate build-up Agata Block 6,000 Sal 8,000 Depth km 4,000 2,000 3-BRSA-1183-RJS R0264 SANTOS CONSTELLATION Courtesy CGG Fault Basement Salt Carbonate reservoir Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 Broader view of the Turmalina Block Campos Basin Turmalina Block Courtesy PGS - R0014 SANTOS III PSDM AKA SANTOS VISION Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 Potential for carbonate build-up Turmalina Block Courtesy PGS - R0014 SANTOS III PSDM AKA SANTOS VISION Fault Basement Salt reservoir volcanic Source Avila, R Technical Seminar of the first production sharing open acreage round - 2022 4 Takeaways The Brazilian Pre-salt is among the most high-profile deepwater plays worldwide It s still attracting oil companies to Brazil All blocks on offer have potential for new oil discoveries Recent stromatolites from Shark Bay, WA Source Department of Mines and Petroleum of Australia epetersohn anp.gov.br epetersohn stanford.edu

[END_OF_PAPER]

Brazilian Journal of Geophysics 2021 39 3 435-447 2021 Brazilian Geophysical Society ISSN 0102-261X DOI 10.22564 rbgf.v39i3.2110 APPLICATION OF SEISMIC ARCHITECTURE INTERPRETATION IN PRE-SALT CARBONATE RESERVOIRS OF THE BUZIOS FIELD, SANTOS BASIN, OFFSHORE BRAZIL Pedro Henrique C. de Macedo 1 , De bora R. Barretto Igor de Andrade Neves 1, Francisco R. Abrantes Junior 1,3 and Wagner Moreira Lupinacci 1,2, 1,2 ABSTRACT. The Brazilian pre-salt carbonate reservoirs, in deep water, are examples of interesting places for oil and gas industry exploration due to their high production capacity. Oil and gas companies are often collecting information about the geology and the reservoir s characteristics to improve its understanding and consequently optimize the production results. Seismic interpretation is mandatory for the understanding of geology, always pondering reducing the risks during exploration. Seismic and well data are commonly used together as a useful approach to comprehend the geological history and provide a good reservoir characterization. In this paper, we performed the seismic interpretation of the pre-salt carbonate reservoirs of the Buzios Field, Santos Basin, and used seismic attributes to obtain a better comprehension, as the TecVA attribute. Also, we generated isopach maps for a better understanding of reservoir intervals. As a result, we achieved a better definition of fault distribution and tectonic behavior, as well as determined the main interval thickness and the possibility of build-up and coquina bank occurrence. Keywords seismic interpretation, reservoir characterization, pre-salt. RESUMO. Os reservato rios carbona ticos do pre -sal brasileiro, em a guas profundas, consistem em um dos locais mais procurados pela indu stria de energia devido a sua capacidade de produc a o. Empresas de o leo e ga s esta o frequentemente adquirindo novas informac o es sobre a geologia e a caracterizac a o de reservato rios, para melhorar seu entendimento e, consequentemente, otimizar os resultados da produc a o. Dados si smicos e de poc os sa o comumente usados juntos como uma abordagem u til para compreender a histo ria geolo gica e fornecer uma boa caracterizac a o do reservato rio. A interpretac a o si smica e obrigato ria para o entendimento da geologia, sempre pensando em reduzir os riscos durante a explorac a o e a produc a o, auxiliando na compreensa o da histo ria geolo gica, ale m de fornecer informac o es necessa rias para a caracterizac a o do reservato rio. Neste trabalho, realizamos a interpretac a o si smica das principais discorda ncias da sec a o do pre -sal do Campo de Bu zios, Bacia de Santos, com o auxi lio do atributo TecVA. Mapas de iso pacas tambe m foram gerados para um melhor entendimento das sec o es dos reservato rios. Como resultados, obtivemos uma melhor definic a o da distribuic a o de falhas e comportamento tecto nico, bem como determinamos a espessura do intervalo principal e a localizac a o de possi veis build-ups e bancos de coquinas. Palavras-chave interpretac a o si smica, caracterizac a o de reservato rios, pre -sal. Corresponding author Wagner Moreira Lupinacci 1Universidade Federal Fluminense UFF , Exploratory Interpretation and Reservoir Characterization Group GIECAR , Department of Geology and Geophysics, Nitero i, RJ, Brazil E-mails pmacedo id.uff.br debora barretto hotmail.com fabrantes id.uff.br igorgeol gmail.com wagnerlupinacci id.uff.br 2National Institute of Science and Technology of Petroleum Geophysics INCT-GP CNPq , Nitero i, RJ, Brazil 3PRIO, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil 436 APPLICATION OF SEISMIC ARCHITECTURE INTERPRETATION IN PRE-SALT CARBONATE RESERVOIRS INTRODUCTION The Santos Basin represents the largest pre-salt exploration and production area in Brazil. Currently, it accounts for more than 70 of the country s oil and gas production ANP, 2021 . In this context, the Buzios Field is considered a super-giant field with an estimated volume in place of 3,058 million barrels of oil equivalent. In January 2021, the outstanding result of 146,524 Bbl d was achieved by the platform with the highest oil production in the country. In this Basin, the main reservoirs are the inner coquinas a type of sedimentary rock composed mainly by shells and their fragments of the Itapema Formation and the spherulitic, laminated deposits, shrubs, and reworked facies of the Barra Velha Formation Gomes et al., 2020 . The carbonate sedimentation processes are extremely sensitive to climatic factors, hydrodynamics, basin tectonics and morphology. These differences might cause vertical and lateral heterogeneity effects in seismic facies Porta, 2015 . Castro 2019 showed that the Itapema Formation in the Buzios Field is less influenced by the presence of fine grain sediments and has better permeabilities than the Barra Velha Formation. Both formations are important presalt exploration targets and have quite different sedimentary-tectonic contexts. The objective of this work is to understand the evolution of the rift and sag phases in the Buzios Field area from seismic data analysis. Furthermore, this paper intends to collaborate for a better understanding of the paleoenvironments and tectonic settings of the Itapema and Barra Velha formations, Barremian-Aptian succession of the Santos Basin. Geological Setting The Santos Basin is located in the southeastern Brazilian margin, bounded by the Campos Basin at the North, and the Pelotas Basin at the South. Santos Basin is one of the most extensive offshore Brazilian basins, with an area of 352,000 km2, and a current water depth of up to Braz. J. Geophys., 39 3 , 2021 3,000 m. The main structural features are the Cabo Frio High to the Northeast and the Floriano polis Platform to the Southwest, the Santos hinge line to the West, which marks the external western limit of the salt Ariri Formation , and the Sa o Paulo plateau to the East Moreira et al., 2007 . The Buzios Field is located in the Santos Basin Fig. 1 . According to Moreira et al. 2007 , the geological history of the Santos Basin can be divided into three phases Rift, Post-rift and Drift. The Rift phase displays extension efforts of separation between the South American and African plates, which started from the Lower Cretaceous. Muniz and Bosence 2015 describe that the sequence of tectonic events that caused the fragmentation of Gondwana would have started from the stretching and thinning process of the continental crust, triggering a rifting process. This fragmentation consisted of a mixed process controlled by lithospheric stretching and thermal anomalies. The breakup of Gondwana occurred over a complex and heterogeneous basement, composed of Paleoproterozoic Archaean age cratonic blocks and Neoproterozoic orogenic rocks Heilbron et al., 2008 , in addition to presenting a Paleozoic sedimentary coating covered by Eocretaceous volcanic rocks. As stated by Moreira et al. 2007 , the crystalline basement of the Santos Basin, generated in the context of Gondwana s amalgamation, is characterized by granites and gneisses from Precambrian age of the Coastal Complex and metasediments of the Ribeira Belt Moreira et al., 2007 . During the main rifting process, around 145 Ma, the northwestern portion remained closed while a wedge was extended to the South, along the east of South America Szatmari and Milani, 2016 . According to the authors, volcanism would have been absent where the lithosphere was thick. An important consequence during the rift phase was the space-forming mechanism for sedimentary accommodation in an extensional tectonic setting, and widespread normal fault generation due to the mechanical subsidence process, causing reactivation of faults in the Precambrian basement Mohriak et al., 2008 . MACEDO ET AL. 437 Figure 1 - Location map of the Buzios Field. Strugale et al. 2021 point out that the different basement compositions represent another determining factor for the way the rifting process takes place. Where the basement is heterogeneous, the pre-existing fabric was reactivated whenever its orientation was favorable, producing faults as the extension direction rotates, whereas low to very low angle basement fabric were cross-cut by rift faults. Where the basement was homogeneous and more stable, only the previous formed faults remained active throughout the rifting. Another effect observed was the contribution and influence of thermal anomalies in the region of the Santos Basin, which would have been responsible for inducing the strain softening process since the beginning of the rift, leading to the development of uplifted areas ANP LEBAC, 2003 . The importance of understanding the different processes related to the rifting phase relies on comprehending its influence during the deposition of the overlying sedimentary layers. The rift super-sequence is composed of continental siliciclastic, talc-stevensite ooids with interbedded lacustrine coquinas and organic-rich shales of the Pic arras and Itapema formations, consisting of essentially continental sediments Szatmari and Milani, 2016 . As opposed to what was proposed by Moreira et al. 2007 , Wright Barnett 2015 state that the lower part of the Barra Velha Formation belongs to the rift phase. During the rift phase, the sediments from the bottom of the Barra Velha Formation were deposited. These deposits show a prominent wedge geometry, which may represent differences in the fault movement rate that consequently created space for accommodation Buckley et al., 2015 . Thus, they state that this may represent an increase in the sedimentation rate at the base of the Barra Velha Formation when compared to the Pic arras and Itapema formations. The post-rift sequence, also known as the sag phase, is represented by the Upper Barra Velha Formation, which is characterized by shrubs, spherulite, laminated deposits and reworked facies Gomes et al., 2020 precipitated in non-marine carbonate successions Wright Barnett 2015 . The absence of unambiguous palaeoecologically significant fossils, together with the presence of the mineral stevensite rather than marine-derived evaporates sulphates and chlorides , indicates an alkaline lacustrine setting with a volcanic source area Wright Barnett 2015 . In short, the pre-salt reservoir rocks are mainly in the Itapema and Barra Velha formations. Braz. J. Geophys., 39 3 , 2021 438 APPLICATION OF SEISMIC ARCHITECTURE INTERPRETATION IN PRE-SALT CARBONATE RESERVOIRS The Itapema Formation is represented by grainstones to bivalves coquinas , wackestones and bioclastic packstones, carbonate shales, and dark shales rich in organic matter, which sometimes also work as source rocks. The Barra Velha Formation is composed of carbonates deposited in a lacustrine environment with a multiplicity of facies from boundstones and grainstones to mudstones. The Itapema Formation is limited at the bottom by the Jiquia Buracica unconformity 126.4 M.y. and at the top by the Pre -Alagoas unconformity, while the Barra Velha Formation is limited at the bottom by the Pre -Alagoas unconformity and at the top by the Base of Salt Moreira et al. 2007 . METHODOLOGY The seismic data provide information about the regional context, depositional systems, tectonic history and allow inferring geological features and heterogeneities, favoring better understanding of sedimentary basins. The interpretation of seismic reflection terminations onlap, downlap, toplap and erosive truncations is the main criteria for the recognition of stratigraphic units . They are essential to better understand the resulting processes, allowing foreseeing the current geological behavior Mitchum et al., 1977 . We performed the identification of seismic parameters to recognize information about the depositional environment, source of sediments and the geological context, in which the seismic facies were deposited. In carbonate rocks, due to the high heterogeneity of these rocks, the integration of well and seismic data is essential for the reservoir characterization. The steps used to develop this work are summarized in Figure 2. The seismic data used consist of a PSDM volume prestacked depth migration , on which we apply a structural smoothing filter to remove part of migration smile noises. The parameterization was a median filter, with a vertical window 5mx5m not to lose the vertical Braz. J. Geophys., 39 3 , 2021 resolution and a lateral window of 7.5m x 7.5 x,y . Then, we interpreted four important unconformities in the pre-salt zone i Economic basement ii Jiquia -Buracica unconformity Pic arras and Itapema Formations iii Pre -Alagoas unconformity top of coquina deposits and the boundary between Itapema and Lower Barra Velha Formations iv Intra-Alagoas unconformity, which separates the Lower Barra Velha from Upper Barra Velha and v the Base of the Salt. Data from 15 wells Fig. 3 helped in the seismic interpretation based on the identification of the boundaries between the lithostratigraphic units. We selected well 9-BUZ-4-RJS through section BB to represent the identification of the main unconformities and formation boundaries and for analysis of depositional environment Fig. 3 . Previous works were also fundamental for a better understanding of the sedimentarytectonic history of the study area Castro, 2019 Ferreira et al., 2021a, 2021b . The seismic attribute TecVA Bulho es and Amorim, 2005 was applied to highlight reflection events, which is calculated from the absolute amplitude or RMS Fig. 4 . After calculating the absolute value of the trace RMS amplitude and its estimation of the seismic trace envelope, the debias filter is applied, and finally a phase rotation at -90o Hilbert transform . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The pre-salt succession of the Santos Basin was described in this work based mainly on the i identification of seismic reflection terminations and the ii interpretation of regional unconformities and faults Figs. 5, 6, 7 and 8 . We recognize in Figure 5 the erosional truncations as reflectors that end on the base of the salt, as a result of possible erosion, especially in the region at the east of the F1 fault, which caused a strong tilt in the strata. We also visualized the amount of onlap markings, present mainly in the region of a build-up, to the East Fig. 6 . It is noted that the MACEDO ET AL. 439 Figure 2 - Location map of the Buzios Field. Figure 3 - Location map of the Buzios Field. Braz. J. Geophys., 39 3 , 2021 440 APPLICATION OF SEISMIC ARCHITECTURE INTERPRETATION IN PRE-SALT CARBONATE RESERVOIRS Figure 4 - Section AA . Original Seismic A and TecVA attribute B with Economic basement red and main faults black highlighted. Figure 5 - Section AA . Schematic stratigraphic sequences and angular relationships defining the boundaries of the stratigraphic units. Braz. J. Geophys., 39 3 , 2021 MACEDO ET AL. 441 horizontal strata ends against an inclined surface, being in this case a possible build-up Figs. 5 and 6 . This onlap configuration is very present in places with faults F2-F3 in Fig. 6 that were generated during the rifting process, which has influence on the formation of accommodation space and generation of wedges in the synrift interval Fig. 5 . It is worth mentioning the possibility of apparent onlaps, terminations that previously presented downlap characteristics, but which underwent a change in geometry due to tectonic activity in half-graben systems, causing a new disposition of the lateral layers as a consequence Hart, 2000 . The Economic Basement was interpreted as a high amplitude reflector due to the high impedance contrast of the basalts with the siliciclastic deposits of the Pic arras Formation. The TecVA attribute helped during the interpretation of this surface unconformity . This attribute allowed improving the characterization of the seismic facies below the basement, which is characterized as chaotic of low amplitude. In addition, TecVa also highlighted the faults of the pre-salt section Fig. 4B . The typical pattern of the basement is the absence of internal reflections or the presence of chaotic reflections. The pre-salt interval in the Buzios Field has horst-graben systems, characteristic of extensional basins Figs. 5, 6, 7 and 8 . The faults are very consistent along the entire rift pre-salt rift succession. These two aspects have influence on geological sedimentation, and the faults might act as fluid conductors Moreira et al., 2007 Szatmari Milani, 2016 throughout the studied sections. In these seismic sections, the fault s orientation is N-S and can reach up to 2 km of displacement. In the syn-rift segment below Intra-Alagoas unconformity , we observed medium to low amplitude reflectors, with subparallel and wavy configurations of medium continuity and low frequency, representing deposits of clastic sediments of the Pic arras Formation. The next unconformity interpreted was Jiquia -Buracica that delimits the lower Itapema Formation. The probable coquinas were interpreted as lacustrine deposits located at structural highs, deposited under shallow and high-energy conditions Figs. 6 and 7 Chinelatto et al., 2020 . The Itapema Formation presented progradational to chaotic seismic facies during the seismic interpretation. Debris flows were also identified according to seismic reflection terminations added to the amplitude information, a possible result of the fragmented configuration due to the rifting process. In the Pre-Alagoas unconformity interpretation, we observed higher amplitudes within plane-parallel seismic facies. The Barra Velha Formation is also subdivided into upper and lower Barra Velha, where the lower one is affected by a characteristic rifting tectonic regime and is described by reworked facies, with rudstones and grainstones being the prevailing facies Arienti et al., 2018 . The upper one, beneath the salt, shows a predominance of flat arrangement in situ facies, portraying a sag phase tectonic quiescence Wright Barnett, 2015 Neves et al., 2019 Silva, 2021 . Because of this aspect, the layers are conformable. We recognized the transition between lake bottom patterns of the upper rift phase passing upward to aggradational progradational carbonate platform during the sag phase, indicating distal facies at the base of the sequence, which can be attributed to the fault development in the region during the Barra Velha Formation deposition. This fact helps to corroborate that the tectonic quiescence expected for the sag phase is not that much of a truth indicating that the upper section of the Barra Velha could be subdivided into upper rift and sag phases, which was proposed by Wright Barnett 2015 , Neves et al. 2019 , and Silva 2021 . It is visualized in Figure 6 that the coquina bank is limited by two normal faults, F1 and F2, sectioning the coquina bank in the central part of a structural high. Figure 7 displays a structural high controlled by faults F1 and F3 and represents a preferential zone of coquinas formation, observed in well 9-BUZ-4-RJS. As can be seen between faults F2 and F3 Fig. 6 , Braz. J. Geophys., 39 3 , 2021 442 APPLICATION OF SEISMIC ARCHITECTURE INTERPRETATION IN PRE-SALT CARBONATE RESERVOIRS Figure 6 - Seismic section AA with unconformities and faults interpretation. F1, F2, F3 represent important faults. F1-F2 develop the compartmentalization of the inferred coquina bank. F1 and F3 show its extension to the base of the salt. It is also possible to recognize a build-up in the East dashed red circle and a Horst-Graben configuration. Figure 7 - Seismic section BB with unconformity and fault interpretation. The black vertical line shows well 9-BUZ-4-RJS, which provided information during the interpretation of the main unconformities. The yellow arrows indicate a thickness increase of the Itapema interval due to the tectonics. Braz. J. Geophys., 39 3 , 2021 MACEDO ET AL. 443 Figure 8 - Architectural analysis of the seismic section CC , highlighting the depositional system distribution and tectonic settings of the Barra Velha and Itapema formations. the thickness of the Barra Velha Formation was increased. We point out this effect as an accommodation space creation. The Sag phase is assigned as a period of tectonic quiescence. However, we can notice faults that reach the Base of the Salt Figs. 6 and 7 , leading to the discussion about the presence of some tectonic activity in this period. Architectural differences between Barra Velha and Itapema formations, especially related to the thickness and strata geometry, can be observed in the Buzios Field Fig. 8 . The Itapema Formation exhibits fragmented asymmetric sections bounded by faults, internally presenting apparent onlap reflectors. All studied sections present this geometry and can be interpreted as half-graben structures formed during the rift phase Figs. 6, 7, and 8 . It is noted that the rifting configuration as horsts and grabens is mandatory for space creation in the structural lows and displays a huge space for sedimentation. In the central region of section CC there is a structural high that controls the nearest sedimentation and allows the creation of a carbonate platform in a shallow zone. F3 marks another break caused by tectonics, which changes the sedimentation of the Itapema Formation to a bottom lake sedimentation. Comparatively, Barra Velha Formation also displays facies controlled by tectonics, with F1 reaching the base of the salt. The sedimentation shows pathways modified due to tectonics, but the layers are more continuous than the ones in Itapema Formation. The space creation was more homogeneous than the one described in the Itapema succession. The Barra Velha platform was bounded by main faults and the development of build-ups Fig. 8 . The platform slope exhibits low inclination angles and the bottom lake areas are quite widespread. The shallow platform allowed a greater deposition of carbonate sediments. It is important to highlight that fault F1 reaches the base of the salt, which leads us to a discussion about the possibility of tectonics during the sag phase at upper Barra Velha. Braz. J. Geophys., 39 3 , 2021 444 APPLICATION OF SEISMIC ARCHITECTURE INTERPRETATION IN PRE-SALT CARBONATE RESERVOIRS We identified the following seismic patterns during interpretation 1. Carbonate build-ups probably controlled by hydrothermal activity at the edge of faults 2. Carbonate platform sedimentation controlled by topography and bathymetry, presenting aggradational or progradational character 3. Extensive carbonate platforms with planeparallel architecture present in the structural highs 4. Debris flow to the right of F3, Fig. 6 , correlated to the tectonics. The carbonate mounds are often recognized presenting an internal low-amplitude reflector behavior, with great possibility to be an excellent reservoir Jesus et al. 2019 Ferreira et al., 2019, 2021a . The build-ups display aggradational geometries that are onlapped and overlain by evaporates Figs. 5 and 6 . Above the Barra Velha Formation, during the Neoaptian, the evaporites of the Ariri Formation were deposited. The base of the salt has a high amplitude characteristic and acts as the hydrocarbon seal at the region. An isopach map provides information on a geological horizon and, when combined with other geological information, it can help the geologist interpret the tectonic activity and the history of this layer and its time segment. The isopach map focuses on a special horizon and allows thickness analysis. Based on the isopach maps Fig. 9 , we analyzed the thickness of each reservoir interval, Itapema and Barra Velha strata, to better understand their deposition phases over time, which is characterized as an important step for future modeling. To the Southeast, we see a thickness increase of the Barra Velha Formation Fig. 9A , with probable mounds. At this location, the creation of accommodation space was very high. Figure 9B displays a thickness increase at the central part of Itapema Formation, at the same place where we observed a probable coquina bank restricted to the structural highs Braz. J. Geophys., 39 3 , 2021 between the main faults. This configuration shows that the basic architecture and distribution of the shallow platforms and bottom lake areas remained similar with some differences during the deposition of these two lithostratigraphic units. However, the zones of high and low accommodation space vary with the tectonic context Fig. 8 i heterogeneous in the Itapema Formation, due to development of half-graben structures and ii very homogeneous in the Barra Velha Formation due to the dominance of sag basin dynamics high accommodation regions controlled by rifting processes can be identified related to the lower Barra Velha sedimentation . Szatmari and Milani 2016 also point out that there is an increase in the occurrence of oil reserves at the south of the Santos Basin. According to the authors, there is an increase of thickness to the South with the widening and deepening of the rift. This pattern was also observed for the study area. CONCLUSIONS Evidence of faults affecting the upper rift and sag sections in the location of the studied seismic sections indicates that the tectonic activity is at least locally controlling the sag phase sedimentation in some segments of the Buzios Field. We identified seismic patterns as carbonate build-ups, probably controlled by hydrothermal activity at the edge of faults, and carbonate platform sedimentation, controlled by topography and bathymetry, presenting aggradational or progradational character with plane-parallel architecture in the structural highs. Debris flows are correlated to the tectonics and there are platform slopes close to the main faults, indicating the horst-graben system. The coquinas found towards the top of the Itapema Formation are associated with structural highs, influenced by faults acting as depositional controllers. The thickness of the Barra Velha Formation increases along the section due to the geological behavior and tectonic activity. The thickness and geological structure of the Itapema Formation are more affected by the MACEDO ET AL. 445 Figure 9 - Isopachs showing the thickness variation of Barra Velha A and Itapema B formations. AA , BB , and CC are the seismic sections and the X point in the Barra Velha isopach map A displays a thickness increase, with a possibility of carbonate mounds. The red circle in B displays the interpreted coquina bank in the Itapema Formation. faults than they are in Barra Velha Formation, which displays more plan-parallel facies. We observe an improvement of thickness of both formations from the North to the South, as can be seen at the isopach maps, and comparing sections AA and CC . It might indicate more favorable environmental conditions for the development of carbonate facies due to development of shallow zones. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors would like to thank the anonymous revisors for dedicating time to improve this manuscript with constructive comments. The authors would like to thank the Brazilian Petroleum Agency for providing the seismic and well data used in this research and Emerson-Paradigm for providing academic environment software access for the development of this study. The authors are grateful to the Instituto Nacional de Cie ncia e Tecnologia de Geofi sica do Petro leo INCTGP CNPq , Fundac a o Carlos Chagas Filho de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado do Rio de Janeiro FAPERJ , and the Coordenac a o de Aperfeic oamento de Pessoal de Ni vel Superior CAPES for the support to this research. REFERENCES ANP - Age ncia Nacional do Petro leo, Ga s Natural e Biocombusti veis. 2021. Boletim da Produc a o de Petro leo e Ga s Natural. Superintende ncia de Desenvolvimento e Produc a o, jan. 2021, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil. ANP LEBAC. 2013. Interpretac a o e mapeamento dos sistemas petroli feros da Bacia de Santos Tomo I. Age ncia Nacional do Petro leo, Ga s Natural e Biocombusti veis Laborato rio de Estudos de Bacias. Internal Report, 170 pp, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil. ARIENTI LM, SOUZA RS, VIANA S, CUGLIERI MA, SILVA RP, TONIETTO S PAULA L, GIL JA. 2018. Facies Association, Depositional Systems, and Paleophysiographic Models of the Barra Velha Formation, Pre-Salt Sequence Santos Basin, Brazil. In AAPG Annual Convention Exhibition 2018, Salt Lake City, Utah. BUCKLEY JD, BOSENCE DW ELDERS CF. 2015. Tectonic setting and stratigraphic architecture of an Early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonate platform, Sugar Loaf High, Santos Basin, Brazil. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 418 1 17. DOI 10.1144 SP418.13 Braz. J. Geophys., 39 3 , 2021 446 APPLICATION OF SEISMIC ARCHITECTURE INTERPRETATION IN PRE-SALT CARBONATE RESERVOIRS BULHO ES EM AMORIM WN. 2005. Princi pio da sismocamada elementar e sua aplicac a o a te cnica volume de amplitudes TecVA . In 9th International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society EXPOGEF. Salvador, BA, Brazil, p. 11 14. DOI 10.1190 sbgf2005-275 CASTRO TM. 2019. Avaliac a o dos reservato rios carbona ticos do pre -sal no Campo de Buzios, Bacia de Santos. Master Dissertation Postgraduate Program in Dynamics of Oceans and Earth Universidade Federal Fluminense, Nitero i, RJ, Brazil, 182 pp. CHINELATTO GF, BELILA AMP, BASSO M, SOUZA JPP, VIDAL AC. 2020. A taphofacies interpretation of shell concentrations and their relationship with petrophysics A case study of Barremian-Aptian coquinas in the Itapema Formation, Santos Basin-Brazil. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 116 104317. DOI 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2020.104317 FERREIRA DJA, LUPINACCI WM, NEVES IA, ZAMBRINI JPR, FERRARI AL GAMBOA LAP. 2019. Unsupervised seismic facies classification applied to a presalt carbonate reservoir, Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. AAPG Bulletin, 103 4 997 1012. DOI 10.1306 10261818055 FERREIRA DJA, DIAS RM LUPINACCI WM. 2021a. Seismic Pattern Classification Integrated with Permeability-Porosity Evaluation for Reservoir Characterization of Presalt Carbonates in the Buzios Field, Brazil. Journal Petroleum Science and Engineering, 201 108441. DOI 10.1016 j.petrol.2021.108441 FERREIRA DJA, DUTRA HPL, CASTRO TM, LUPINACCI WM. 2021b. Geological process modeling and geostatistics for facies reconstruction of presalt carbonates. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 124 104828. DOI 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2020.104828 GOMES JP, BUNEVICH RB, TEDESCHI LR, TUCKER ME WHITAKER FF. 2020. Facies classification and patterns of lacustrine carbonate deposition of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazilian Presalt. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 113 104176. DOI 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2019.104176 HART BS. 2000. 3-D Seismic Interpretation A Primer for Geologists. SEPM Society for Braz. J. Geophys., 39 3 , 2021 Sedimentary Geology Short Course 48 123. DOI 10.2110 scn.00.01 HEILBRON M, VALERIANO CM, TASSINARI CCG, ALMEIDA J, TUPINAMBA M, SIGA O TROUW R. 2008. Correlation of Neoproterozoic terranes between the Ribeira Belt, SE Brazil and its African counterpart comparative tectonic. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 294 1 211 237. DOI 10.1144 SP294.12 JESUS C, OLHO AZUL M, LUPINACCI WM, MACHADO L. 2019. Multiattribute framework analysis for the identification of carbonate mounds in the Brazilian presalt zone. Interpretation, 7 2 T467 T476. DOI 10.1190 INT-2018-0004.1 MITCHUM JRRM, VAIL PR SANGREE JB. 1977. Seismic stratigraphy and global changes of sea level, part 6 Interpretation of seismic reflection patterns in depositional sequences. In Payton C. E. Ed . AAPG Memoir 26 - Seismic stratigraphy Applications to hydrocarbon exploration. Tulsa, American Association of Petroleum Geologists, 117 133. DOI 10.1306 M26490C8 MOHRIAK W, NEMCOK M ENCISO G. 2008. South Atlantic divergent margin evolution riftborder uplift and salt tectonics in the basins of SE Brazil. Geological Society, London, Special Publications 294 365 398. DOI 10.1144 SP294.19 MOREIRA JLP, MADEIRA CV, GIL, JA MACHADO MAP. 2007, Bacia de Santos Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, 15 2 531 550. MUNIZ, MC, BOSENCE, DWJ. 2015. Pre-salt microbialites from the Campos Basin Offshore Brazil image log facies, facies model and cyclicity in lacustrine carbonates. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 418 221 242. DOI 10.1144 SP418.10 NEVES IA, LUPINACCI WM, FERREIRA DJA, ZAMBRINI JPR, OLIVEIRA LOA, OLHO AZUL M, FERRARI AL GAMBOA LAP. 2019. Presalt reservoirs of the Santos Basin Cyclicity, electrofacies, and tectonic-sedimentary evolution. Interpretation, 7 4 SH33. DOI 10.1190 int-2018-0237.1 MACEDO ET AL. 447 PORTA GD. 2015 Carbonate build-ups in lacustrine, hydrothermal and fluvial settings comparing depositional geometry, fabric types and geochemical signature. In BOSENCE DWJ, GIBBONS KA, LE HERON DP, MORGAN WA, PRITCHARD T, VINING BA Eds. . Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. Geological Society, London, Special Publication, 418. 17 68. SILVA RC. 2021. Construc a o de um modelo tectono-estratigra fico com foco no reservato rio carbona tico do pre -sal do Prospecto Gato do Mato, Bacia de Santos. Master Dissertation Postgraduate Program in Dynamics of Oceans and Earth Universidade Federal Fluminense, Nitero i, RJ, Brazil. 112 pp. STRUGALE M, SCHMITT RS CARTWRIGHT J. 2021. Basement geology and its controls on the nucleation and growth of rift faults in the northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Basin Research 33 1906 1933. DOI 10.1111 bre.12540 SZATMARI P, MILANI EJ. 2016. Tectonic control of the oil-rich large igneous-carbonatesalt province of the South Atlantic rift Marine and Petroleum Geology, 77 567 596. DOI 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2016.06.004 WRIGHT VP BARNETT AJ. 2015. An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 418 209 219. DOI 10.1144 SP418.3 P.H.C.M. Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Writing original draft, Writing revising editing, Visualization. D.R.B. Software, Validation, Investigation, Writing revising editing, Visualization. F.R.A.J. Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation, Investigation, Writing original draft, Writing revising editing, Visualization, Supervision. I.A.N. Methodology, Validation, Investigation. W.M.L. Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation, Investigation, Writing original draft, Writing revising editing, Visualization, Supervision. Received on December 8, 2021 Accepted on April 7, 2022 - Creative Commons attribution-type BY Braz. J. Geophys., 39 3 , 2021

[END_OF_PAPER]

Marine and Petroleum Geology 88 2017 676e695 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Marine and Petroleum Geology journal homepage www.elsevier.com locate marpetgeo Research paper Three-dimensional stratigraphic-sedimentological forward modeling of an Aptian carbonate reservoir deposited during the sag stage in the Santos basin, Brazil Desiree Liechoscki de Paula Faria a, b, , Antonio Tadeu dos Reis a, Olinto Gomes de Souza Jr. b o Francisco Xavier, 524, 4 Andar, Maracana , Rio de Janeiro, RJ, CEP 22550-900, School of Oceanography, Rio de Janeiro State University UERJ , Rua Sa Brazil b PETROBRAS S.A, Avenida Repu blica do Chile, 330, Centro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, CEP 20031-170, Brazil a a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t Article history Received 25 February 2017 Received in revised form 20 August 2017 Accepted 13 September 2017 Available online 18 September 2017 Stratigraphic-sedimentological forward modeling is a useful technique to test the role of parameters that may act in the depositional processes of sedimentary rocks. The technique was applied to the Santos basin, Brazil, using the software program DIONISOS to test possible depositional scenarios for an Aptian section of a lacustrine carbonate platform developed during the late sag stage uppermost pre-salt section of the basin. Different parameters were tested in a set of numerical simulations with the aim of reproducing the carbonate facies spatial distribution and the overall stratigraphic stacking pattern of the platform, as observed in the available well data. Several models were simulated, and four of them are discussed in this paper. Based on the available descriptive data from 10 wells, Model 3 is considered to produce the best fit to explain the development of the 100-m thick Aptian carbonate platform, occurrences of grainstones and stromatolites as proximal and intermediate facies, respectively, and the overall carbonate stacking pattern. Thus, based on 3D stratigraphic-sedimentological forward modeling, the best set of environmental conditions able to explain the pattern of carbonate deposition observed in the study area are 1 a slow carbonate depositional rate 0.08 mm y over an interval of 2.4 My , which is indicative of a larger microbial contribution, and 2 lake-level oscillations, which were essentially induced by arid climatic conditions. These results also enable new perspectives for the application of stratigraphicsedimentological forward modeling as a predictive tool for hydrocarbon exploration in carbonates and for the development of depositional models of other sag carbonate platform settings. 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Keywords 3D stratigraphic-sedimentological forward modeling Aptian carbonates Lacustrine sag carbonates Carbonate reservoir Rifted margin 1. Introduction The offshore Santos basin, which is located on the southeastern Brazilian continental margin, is a huge hydrocarbon province. In the early 2000s, oil discoveries in deep and ultra-deep waters in the Barremian-Aptian carbonate section of the rift and sag basin stages resulted in new and massive economic interest in the area. Oil reserves within such stratigraphic sequences are estimated to exceed 45 billion barrels Szatmari and Milani, 2016 . The rift-sag carbonate section is also known as the pre-salt Corresponding author. PETROBRAS S.A, Avenida Repu blica do Chile, 330, Centro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, CEP 20031-170, Brazil. E-mail address desiree.lpfaria gmail.com D. Liechoscki de Paula Faria . http dx.doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2017.09.013 0264-8172 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. sequence due to its location under an impressively thick evaporite layer that is 2000e2500 m thick Chang et al., 1990 Pereira and Macedo, 1990 Dias, 1998 . Such thick salts above the carbonate reservoir and the low contrast rock densities compromise seismic imaging and the application of seismic attributes for the prediction of sedimentary body geometries and distribution of facies. Forward stratigraphic-sedimentological modeling therefore appears to be an alternative method that is applicable to simulations of sedimentary facies distributions, including those of carbonate environments e.g., Warrlich et al., 2008 . Forward modeling provides quantitative tools for testing and appraising the control parameters in multiple stratigraphic scenarios of a basin s evolution, making predictions of facies distributions and geometries between data points, supporting subsurface data interpretations, and conducting sensitivity tests to evaluate the major stratigraphic controls of D. Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 88 2017 676e695 basins Lawrence et al., 1990 . In this paper, we model the stacking pattern and sedimentary facies distribution of an Aptian lacustrine carbonate platform that composes the uppermost sedimentary succession of the sag stage in the Santos basin through tests and simulations of six parameters that act in the depositional process of carbonate rocks i initial lake paleobathymetry ii run time iii lake level oscillation curves iv values of subsidence rates extracted from the literature v carbonate depositional rates in mm y and vi different bathymetric intervals for carbonate deposition This study aims at the determination of a facies model to reproduce the sedimentary stacking pattern observed in well data and, finally, to propose a useful conceptual geological model for the deposition of the studied carbonate platform. 2. Geological setting The Aptian carbonate platform focused on in this study is located in the central portion of the Santos basin, approximately 310 km off the coast of the S ao Paulo state Fig. 1 . The origin and evolution of the basin are related to the breakup of the Gondwana Supercontinent, but the Santos basin consists of a specific area that forms a kinematic buffer between the Austral and Central segments of the South Atlantic Ocean Moulin et al., 2010, 2012 . Breakup initiated during the Early Cretaceous and culminated with the opening of the South Atlantic Ocean and implantation of the Brazilian marginal basins in the so called Brazilian Rift System Chang et al., 1992 . In a regional context of rift development from south to north along the southeastern and eastern continental margins, the 677 Santos basin progressed from small grabens and lakes to a regional subsidence setting that created extensive sag-phase lacustrine deposits Carminatti et al., 2008 Quirk et al., 2013 . Thermal subsidence was then implemented by setting up a restricted environment, with extensive deposition of evaporites during the Aptian. At the beginning of the Albian, a shallow carbonate platform was generated with the progression of the South Atlantic opening. From the Middle Albian onwards, the shallow carbonate platform was progressively drowned, leading to the development of an open ocean setting in a passive margin tectonic environment Mio, 2005 . The stratigraphic sequence of the studied carbonate platform was deposited during the Neoaptian sag phase of the basin Fig. 2 . The depositional environment of this sequence was marked by a transitional setting between continental to shallow marine conditions. Its upper limit is the base of the 113 My evaporites that mark the passage from a mixed clastic-carbonate sedimentary sequence to an evaporitic environment Moreira et al., 2007 . There are no published and available models regarding the morphological configuration of the sag lacustrine environments of the studied carbonate platform. However, Szatmari and Milani 2016 proposed a configuration model for the lakes of the South Atlantic rift province that may be appropriate to the studied carbonate platform, which developed during the sag phase of the Santos basin. According to that model, structural highs horsts would separate two distinct lakes, which would eventually communicate as a result of the rising of lake levels due to combinations of low evaporation and high precipitation rates and become isolated again with the decrease in lake levels due to Fig. 1. Location map of the study area. The dashed gray polygon marks the limit of the pre-salt field s occurrence in the Santos and Campos basins. The structural map base of salt of the platform, where the study was developed based on the availability of 10 wells A to J and seismic grid, is outlined in red. The dashed blue lines are the nine seismic sections where structural restorations were performed. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. 678 D. Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 88 2017 676e695 Fig. 2. Stratigraphic chart of the Santos basin, Brazil Modified from Moreira et al., 2007 the studied interval is highlighted by the red line. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. D. Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 88 2017 676e695 combinations of high evaporation and low precipitation rates . That means that there would be a direct response of the behavior of the lakes and carbonate deposition imposed by climatic conditions. The proposed configuration of the lakes would form an arrangement similar to the East African Rift System, which remains the continental rift archetype and analogue widely used for the early stages of the evolution of passive continental margins prior to the opening of oceans Rosendahl et al., 1986 . In a rift system, however, the distance between lakes tends to decrease with the evolution of the rift the Aptian lakes of the Santos basin would be in a more advanced stage of development than the East African lakes, which are still quite isolated from each other. 2.1. Aptian carbonates of the Santos basin The studied Aptian carbonates of the Santos basin constitute a 100-m-thick stratigraphic sequence that corresponds to part of the upper portion of the Barra Velha Formation, Guaratiba Group, whose sediments were deposited during the sag phase of the basin Fig. 2 . Concerning its formation environment, the hypothesis that the Aptian carbonates of the Santos basin have a marine origin has been excluded due to the absence of marine fossils e.g., Wright and Barnett, 2015 , including typical marine environmental indicators such as miliolid foraminifera. Ostracods are present but in forms that demonstrate a high salinity tolerance compatible with hypersaline environments such as those of lacustrine lakes. Sulfate minerals such as gypsum and anhydrite are also absent, equally suggesting that these carbonates are not of marine origin Wright and Barnett, 2015 . Based on well data, four main sedimentary facies can be identified within the stratigraphic sequence of the carbonate platform, according to Terra et al. 2010 stromatolites STR , grainstones GST , laminites LMT and spherulitites SPH . The main reservoir facies are stromatolites and grainstones. Similar carbonates facies were also recognized at the regional scale of the South Atlantic Aptian lacustrine carbonates by Wright and Barnett 2015 under the form of i shrub-type stromatolites, ii laminites and iii spherulitites. Shrubs are millimetric to centimetric in size, composed of radial fibrous calcite, and occur as a single or branched structure aggregates of calcite are divergent and plumose fascicular optic calcite sensu Kendall, 1977 Grotzinger and Knoll, 1999 . Shrubs occur in layers, with predominantly vertical growth, and are interbedded with thinner sediments, giving a stratified appearance. Lamellar units composed of shrubs can reach metric scale, forming build-ups. Shrubs are also commonly fragmented and mixed with laminites and spherulitites, forming reworked rocks grainstones to wackestones . Laminites are composed of millimeter sheets of coalescing fibrous calcite. Spherulitites are symmetric spheres of fibro-radiated calcite Spherulites sensu Hodgson, 1968 Schroeder, 1972 Chafetz and Butler, 1980 Verrecchia et al., 1995 that commonly present diameters less than 2 mm Terra et al., 2010 . In some cases, spherulitites occur in a matrix of magnesium clay and are oriented parallel to the bedding and replace and or displace the matrix. According to Garcia-Ruiz 2000 , Beck and Andreassen 2010 and Meister et al. 2011 , spherulites grow in alkaline solutions rich in Mg and silica and are associated with the rapid growth of calcite crystals, with or without microbial influence. Wright and Barnett 2015 explain that intense evaporation would produce super saturated and alkaline waters, being the trigger for the precipitation of magnesium silicate, initially as a gel. As the precipitation rates of this gel decrease or cease, calcite crystals can develop and grow in the water column evidence of the presence of some traces of magnesium silicate remain, however. 679 2.2. Analogues for the lacustrine carbonates and discussion of the origin of the carbonate deposition For forward stratigraphic-modeling purposes, the following examples of world-class lacustrine carbonate environments have been taken as analogues for the carbonate deposition of the Brazilian Aptian carbonate platform. i. Described carbonate facies of the Yacoraite Formation - Balbuena Sequence in the Met an-Alemania sub-basin, Salta basin, Argentina Bento Freire, 2012 Pedrinha, 2014 , are very similar to those observed in the Aptian carbonates in Santos. As such, they can be regarded as an analogue for the study of carbonate facies cyclicity in the Santos basin section 3.1.1 . The Salta s carbonates correspond to a platform that evolved under a very rare marine influence Bento Freire, 2012 Pedrinha, 2014 . This carbonate sequence is of microbial origin traceable over dozens of kilometers, whose lateral facies variability is conditioned mainly to the accommodation space and local energy of the environment in which they were formed. In the Salta basin, the stromatolite, laminite and grainstone facies are interpreted as carbonate depositions related to arid climate conditions. The laminites are considered to have deposited in shallow water due to their small depositional thicknesses and recurrent associated subaerial exposure features. The thicker stromatolite depositional units, on the other hand, are interpreted as carbonate facies developed at water levels relatively higher than those for the deposition of laminite facies. The grainstones, which were formed by the reworking of carbonate facies, characterize sedimentary processes of high and moderate energy, suggesting that their sedimentation occurred at positions where the lake was affected by currents and wave action. Fine facies e.g., mudstones are also found in Salta basin and are interpreted as carbonate deposits that occurred in low energy portions of the lakes during humid climate conditions. ii. Lake Tanganyika, in the East African Rift System, is a wellstudied modern carbonate environment that can be used as a useful analogue to model the depths of occurrences of stromatolite facies in the Santos basin see sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.4 . The stromatolites of Lake Tanganyika are of biotic origin and are under development in asymmetric half-graben basins, in which relationships between lake depth range and deposition of stromatolite facies are well established Casanova and Thouin, 1990 Casanova and Hillaire-Marcel, 1992 Cohen et al., 1997 . Cohen et al. 1997 have shown that stromatolites in this lake are mainly observed at depths ranging from 10 to 60 m below the actual lake level. Due to Lake Tanganyika s level oscillations during the Holocene, Cohen et al. 1997 estimated the stromatolite original growth depth by the following approach 1 measuring the depth intervals where certain specimens appear to grow, 2 examining fossils of gastropods, which are associated with stromatolites with known depth ranges and 3 correlating stromatolite belts with old coastlines, beachrock belts and sedimentary depth indicator structures. According to the authors, stromatolites would have grown at depths of up to approximately 30 m below lake level. ii. Saller et al. 2016 described several Aptian carbonate facies in the Kwanza basin offshore of Angola that are similar to those observed in the carbonate platform of the Santos basin. Kwanza has not been used in the present study as an analogue for modeling purposes. However, as there are only a few publications on the Aptian carbonate rocks of the Santos basin e.g., Wright and Barnett, 2015 , the Kwanza basin becomes an important example for understanding and discussing the origin of the carbonate facies in the Santos basin. Lacustrine sedimentation in Kwanza has resulted in many unusual carbonate facies that raise questions about the origin of carbonate deposits are they biotic microbial Carminatti et al., 2008 or abiotic Dorobek et al., 2012 Wright and 680 D. Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 88 2017 676e695 Barnett, 2015 Saller et al. 2016 , on the one side, argue that the stromatolite structures are positive structures similar to reefs and were formed by biotic reef organisms growing toward the light in addition, dark organic laminations and erosional embayments support microbial influence. On the other side, Saller et al. 2016 also consider that bundles of fibrous calcite without organic laminations or embayments can be interpreted as abiotic. It is worth mentioning that microbiological deposits and chemical abiotic deposits do not have mutually exclusive or even concurrent occurrences but are commonly associated Grotzinger and Knoll, 1999 Riding, 2008 . In this sense, Saller et al. 2016 consider that the exact morphology of the calcite precipitation is due to the water energy of the lake, the degree of supersaturation and the substrate, with spherulites growing in muddy sediments and shrubs growing in shallow, high-energy, highly supersaturated environments. 3. Study area, materials and methods The area selected for this study is a 9-km x 34-km rectangular area Fig. 1 . The available data set was provided by PETROBRAS. Seismic data comprise a 3D seismic grid with a vertical resolution of circa 30 m and lateral resolution of circa 500 m. The well data are composed of side samples 540 , cores 227 m , electric profiles and image logs from 10 wells Fig. 1 . In the present study, three basic methodological steps were applied to construct the stratigraphic-sedimentological forward models i a review of the carbonate descriptions made internally at PETROBRAS, with the support of collaborators, concerning the carbonate facies analysis from the available well data ii a 2D structural restoration of seismic sections to obtain the paleomorphology reliefs at the beginning and end of the depositional time interval and iii preliminary simulations to test and choose the main parameters to be used in the forward modeling. 3.1. Data analyses The available data were analyzed to establish different geological aspects of the Aptian carbonate sequence of the Santos basin facies analysis and carbonate overall organization subsection 3.1.1 and structural interpretation and restoration of the carbonate stratigraphic sequence subsection 3.1.2 . 3.1.1. Carbonate description facies analysis and carbonate overall organization From the well data analysis, four main facies were observed to occur in the studied carbonate platform laminites LMT , grainstones GST , stromatolites STR and spherulitites SPH . The facies analyses from the wells also revealed that the carbonate overall organization from the base to the top is as follows Fig. 3 i the presence of a thin layer of grainstone at the beginning of the stratigraphic sequence deposition ii the predominance of stromatolite facies at the lower 2 3 of the sedimentary succession, with a small intercalation with spherulitites and iii the occurrence of an intercalation between laminite and grainstone facies at the upper 1 3 of the sedimentary succession. Fig. 4 shows the carbonate facies distribution per well along the studied platform. For the pie chart, only rock data cores and side samples were considered. There is a significant difference in the carbonate facies proportions in well E, which was drilled in a relatively distal position of the platform where the predominance of the spherulitite facies is remarkable in comparison to the other wells drilled in the proximal, higher portions of the carbonate platform. Thus, considering that the center of the lake, which is located in the most central portion of the platform, is shallower than its margins, the facies proportion distribution along the platform Fig. 4 and the facies characteristics, it was possible to estimate the position of each facies in relation to the bathymetric ranges of their occurrences in the lake Bento Freire, 2012 Pedrinha, 2014 . i Laminites occur at the top of the shallow hemicycle Fig. 3 because they are characterized as shallow lake facies by the constant presence of exposure features and by the low accommodation spaces required for their deposition. It was then estimated that laminites occur in the central part of the platform. ii The stromatolites stratigraphic position in the lake is attributed to an increase in accommodation space, especially on the edge of the platform. An increase in accommodation space favors the vertical growth of bush forms. Stromatolites therefore appear in the transitional zone between the shallow and deeper lake environments. iii The grainstones are composed mainly of fragments. The absence of matrix suggests they were formed in a high energy environment. In the cyclicity study Fig. 3 , they represent the moment when the lake level began to rise and rework previously consolidated facies. It was then estimated that grainstones occur in the central part of the platform with laminites. iv Spherulitites are facies associated with a low energy environment due to their common association with magnesium clays. They were therefore positioned on the top of the flood hemicycle Fig. 3 . Together with mudstones facies, they predominate in the platform deeper basin, where a thicker water column is interpreted for lake deposition. Mudstones were not observed in wells but it is estimated that they can occur in the lower portions of the platform. 3.1.2. Structural interpretation and restoration The carbonate platform in this study area developed along a NESW structural high and is limited by normal faults F1, F2 and F3 with the same directions Fig. 5A . F1 has a dip opposite to those of F2 and F3. The carbonate stratigraphic section focused on in the present study is approximately 100 m thick, its base is marked by the yellow reflector Fig. 5A , and the upper limit is represented by the base of the thick regional basin s salt layer orange reflector in Fig. 5A . The main faults intercept the studied seismic horizons and the salt base. Seismic reflectors of the studied stratigraphic interval are characteristically sub-parallel, i.e., no progradation features were observed in the seismic data. A total of nine 2D seismic sections Fig. 1 were restored in the study area, based on inclined shear techniques e.g., White et al., 1986 six of the sections are dip-oriented, and the remaining three are strike-oriented. Fig. 5 shows the results of the structural restoration applied to the section that crosses well C. First, the configuration of main horizons to be restored was interpreted Fig. 5 A . Second, the thick post-salt section was decompacted Fig. 5B . The thick salt layer was then removed Fig. 5C . On this scale, the deformation of the pre-salt sequence by the salt is practically zero. The faulted blocks were then restored Fig. 5D , that is, they were put in their original positions before any structural movement. Finally, the top horizon of the model was adjusted to its original estimated position at the end of the deposition time Fig. 5E . Because this adjustment was manual, it was important to maintain consistency between the seismic horizons, in the sense that a restored section must be geologically reasonable. The restored horizons Fig. 5E in the nine sections were interpolated to create the surfaces serving as inputs for the simulations D. Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 88 2017 676e695 681 Fig. 3. Well facies logs and respective depositional cyclicity analyses carried out in the present work. The red hemicycle represents the shallower lake phase, and the blue hemicycle represents the deeper lake phase. Measured depth MD in meters. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. of the series of simulated stratigraphic-sedimentological models paleomorphological maps of the top and base of the model Fig. 6A and B and the initial bathymetry map Fig. 6C . The initial bathymetry map was the result of normalizing the base map, and the values varied from 0 to 60 m. In other words, the initial bathymetry of the lake in the modeling had depths up to 60 m. 3.2. Forward modeling and input parameters The stratigraphic-sedimentological forward modeling was based on the deterministic reconstruction of depositional processes in a sequence of time steps moving forward in time Hawie et al., 2015 . The DIONISOS Granjeon, 1996 Granjeon and Joseph, 1999 software program was used to simulate the geometric representation of the architecture of the sedimentary sequences and quantification of the sedimentological facies proportions. At each run time, three geological parameters were normally taken into account i the accommodation space that varies according to the subsidence and the lake-level oscillation the upper limit of the space is the lake level position at a given time, and the lower limit is the initial deposition surface at a given time ii the sediment supply, which is defined by the facies deposition as a function of depth and iii sediment transport. The application of these parameter within mass balance principles allows the sedimentation at each point of a carbonate platform and at each time to be defined to simulate the progressive platform deformation and upbuilding and thus to quantify the carbonate sedimentary architecture in 3D, as shown in examples of the modeling of carbonate environments seen in Bourdarot et al. 2014 and Montaggioni et al. 2015 . In the present work, the tested modeling parameters were initial lake bathymetry, run time, lake level oscillation, subsidence and carbonate depositional rates. Reworking processes and transport parameters were not taken into consideration for the simulation shown here because the results were not conclusive. Because the DIONISOS model provides as an output a 3D facies proportion volume for each facie, to show all 3D facies proportion models in a single 3D facies model, it was necessary to numerically determine one facies per grid cell. Thus, when facies X prevailed in the cell by more than 50 , that cell was denoted X . However, in some rare cases, the same or very similar proportions of the 5 simulated facies exist in a single cell. For example, all the model simulations began with equal facies proportions to eliminate any initial tendency of the predominant deposition of one or another facies. Thus, the model grid cells were initially composed of 20 equal proportions of laminites, grainstones, stromatolites, spherulitites and mudstones, being thus denominated hybrid facies HBD . This hybrid facies nomenclature has no geological significance. 3.2.1. The initial and final modeling surfaces and initial bathymetry bathymetric intervals for carbonates facies occurrences The initial and final modeling surfaces correspond to the paleomorphology of the carbonate platform sequence boundaries from the 2D structural restorations see section 3.1.2 above . The initial bathymetry was estimated from the restored base relief morphology of the carbonate platform and normalized to values from 0 to 60 m. That bathymetric range is in agreement with the 682 D. Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 88 2017 676e695 to a carbonate platform under a greater influence of abiotic chemical deposition, or ii during a longer depositional interval, which would be comparable to a carbonate platform under a greater influence of biotic microbial deposition. Fig. 4. Graphical representation, on the restored structural map of the salt base, of the carbonate facies proportion across the carbonate platform. depths at which stromatolites are observed to occur in Lake Tanganyika Cohen et al., 1997 . The final bathymetry was considered to equal zero, indicating the lowest lake level marked by the thick salt layer deposition observed at the upper limit of the studied stratigraphic sequence. It is worth noting, however, that during the simulations, the maximum lake depth achieved depths as great as 100 m due to the constant subsidence and lake level oscillations. 3.2.2. Depositional time interval As precise dating information from wells was not available for the pre-salt carbonate deposition in the Santos basin, two run times were tested in the numerical simulations based on the estimated duration for the deposition of the carbonate platform a short run time of 0.3 My from 113.3 My to 113 My and a longer run time of 2.4 My from 115.4 My to 113 My . The times were estimated as follows. It is known that the upper limit of the total sag phase sequence of the Santos basin is marked by the base of the evaporites 113 My in age Moreira et al., 2007 , whereas the lower limit is marked by the Intra-Aptian Unconformity, or DIA, intra Alagoas Unconformity when considering PETROBRAS internal stratigraphic nomenclature, of 117 My in age Moreira et al., 2007 . Thus, the entire sag interval was deposited in 4 My. Because we are only modeling the uppermost sag carbonate succession, a run time of approximately half of the 4 My was estimated for testing a slow carbonate depositional environment 2.4 My . Accordingly, a value of circa 1 8 of the run time value, equivalent to 0.3 My, was used for testing a rapid carbonate depositional environment. Using variable run times for the models was also important to determine the architecture of the carbonate platform either i during a shorter depositional interval, which would be comparable 3.2.3. Lake-level oscillation and subsidence rate Through identifying and locating the distribution of each facies in relation to lake bathymetry and based on the study of depositional cyclicity see section 3.1.1 above , the cyclical fluctuations of carbonate facies were interpreted as a result of lake level fluctuations. As an example, a depth with the occurrence of a larger proportion of spherulitites facies as described from wells would reflect a humid environment based on the presence of clays and could thus be correlated to an increase in lake bathymetry. Because no lake-level oscillation curve was available in the literature, the quantification of the lake-level oscillations was conceptual ranging from 0 to 100 m , with the intent of creating sufficient accommodation space to deposit the observed sediment thicknesses in the wells. The lake-level oscillation curves were adjusted during the calibration process Fig. 7 to more precisely reproduce the overall facies organization observed in the wells and to test different climate scenarios. In the simulations, the accommodation space is governed by the combination of lake-level oscillation and subsidence. In the absence of known subsidence rates for the sag phase of the studied carbonate platform, we considered the values of subsidence rates produced by regional scale back-stripping subsidence models for the Santos basin published by Contreras et al. 2010 . According to those authors, subsidence during the sag stage of the Santos basin 117-112 My was characterized by relatively constant subsidence rates of about 0.05 mm y across the entire basin. Neither significant depositional gradients nor differential tectonic and flexuralinduced subsidence occur in this sag phase basin. 3.2.4. Carbonate depositional rate For simulation purposes, carbonate deposition is given as a function of time and depositional efficiency vs. water depth. Because there is no consensus regarding the carbonates origin for the studied platform, the depositional rates were based on the ratios between the mean thickness of the carbonate section measured in the wells approximately 100 m and the considered run times 0.3 My and 2.4 My . However, the depositional rates had to be adjusted throughout the simulation tests in order to reproduce the sediment thicknesses observed in the well data. For that goal, the rate was equal to 0.6 mm y in Model 1 and 0.08 mm y in Models 2, 3 and 4. The global distribution of carbonate facies is associated with a coefficient of depositional efficiency according to lake bathymetry. Thus, the efficiency of facies deposition will depend on the bathymetry of the lake at each run time. To establish such a relation for simulation purposes, a non-dimensional efficiency coefficient ranging from 0 the facies will not settle to 1 the facies will settle with 100 efficiency was used to multiply the depositional rate per time to restrict the deposition of each facies within a bathymetric range Fig. 8 . Two relationships between carbonate facies deposition and related bathymetric depths were tested. The first test simulated the occurrence of grainstones and stromatolites as proximal facies deposited between 5 and 20 m deep and as an intermediate facies deposited between 15 and 60 m deep, respectively Fig. 8A . The second test simulated different depths and positions for the occurrences of grainstones and stromatolites facies along the depositional profile therefore, both facies were considered to occur as more proximal facies the deposition of grainstones at depths of 1e10 m and the deposition of stromatolites from depths of Fig. 5. E-W 2D seismic profile across well C. The post salt section blue horizon , the salt pink horizon , the studied depositional sequence in blue , the top in orange and base in yellow of the model interval and the major faults that cut the platform F1, F2 and F3, in black are shown in A. The stages of the structural restoration are presented in B, the postsalt sequence was decompacted in C, the thick salt layer was removed in D, the fault blocks were restored and finally, in E, the top horizon of the model in orange was adjusted to its original estimated position at the end of the deposition. A zoom of section A is shown in A0 , highlighting the possible spherulitite anomaly indicated by the low seismic amplitude peak above the base of the model . The black circle point the main faults intercepting the studied seismic horizons and also the salt base. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. 684 D. Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 88 2017 676e695 10e30 m Fig. 8B . Both tests consider the laminate as the most proximal facies and spherulitites and mudstones as distal facies Fig. 8A and B , according to the facies analysis presented in section 3.1.1. In that context, the hypothesis of shallow bathymetry values for grainstones and stromatolites occurrence presents a straightforward correlation with the depths at which Tanganyika stromatolites are estimated to have been deposited Cohen et al., 1997 . For modeling purposes, an influx of clastic sediments into the studied platform was considered to be absent. In addition, the simulated facies were considered to be representative of the primary depositional conditions, and as a consequence, diagenetic factors were not considered. 4. Results of the stratigraphic-sedimentological forward modeling The main parameters tested as input data for the simulation of the stratigraphic-sedimentological forward modeling and that were capable of affecting the Aptian carbonate stacking pattern and facies distribution observed in the available well data were i the carbonate depositional rate in mm y ii the bathymetric intervals for carbonate facies occurrences, iii initial paleobathymetry, iv lake level oscillation curves and v values of subsidence rates extracted from the literature. After setting the main modeling parameters to be considered, four stratigraphic-sedimentological simulations Models 1 to 4 , among many others undertaken, are presented below they represent those models whose given initial conditions and parameter values resulted in potential predictive responses capable of explaining one or more environmental conditions involved in the deposition of the studied carbonate platform. It is also noteworthy that a all the models were simulated considering the same initial lake bathymetry 60 m deep , b the considered time step of the simulations was 0.01 My for Model 1 30 time steps from 113.3 to 113 My and 0.05 My for Models 2 to 4 48 time steps from 115.4 to 113 My , and c throughout the simulations, various modeling parameters such as lake level oscillation curves and carbonate depositional rates also had to be modified to reproduce the facies stacking pattern observed in the wells. Table 1 summarizes the values of all the changing parameters used in each model. 4.1. Model 1 Stratigraphic-sedimentological Models 1 to 3 simulated grainstones and stromatolites facies as occurring as a proximal facies from 5 to 20 m deep and an intermediate facies from 15 to 60 m deep , respectively Fig. 8A . In Model 1, the initial carbonate depositional rate was 0.3 mm y, which was obtained by the relation between the average sediment thickness observed in the wells 100 m and the considered run time of 0.3 My. However, the depositional rate was insufficient to reproduce the sediment thicknesses observed in all of the wells. For that reason, the carbonate depositional rate was progressively increased to 0.6 mm y, which was the optimum value for the resulting simulated thickness Fig. 9 . This last run of Model 1 was satisfactory from the perspective of the simulated facies proportions when compared with the stacking pattern observed in the well data Fig. 10 1 the presence of a thin layer of grainstone located at the base of the stratigraphic sequence, 2 the predominance of stromatolite facies at the lower 2 3 of the sedimentary succession with an intercalation with spherulitites and 3 the occurrence of intercalations of laminite with grainstone at the top of the wells. The simulated distribution of the facies proportions across the carbonate platform is shown in Fig. 11. Laminite and grainstone Fig. 6. Paleomorphological maps obtained from the structural restoration of 2D seismic lines the top morphology A and base morphology B of the model. The initial bathymetry map C was generated by normalizing the base model map from 0 to 60 m. facies were deposited in the shallower central portion of the platform. Stromatolite facies spread out almost throughout the carbonaceous platform. A spherulitite facies was deposited in the deeper and lower energy portions of the platform with occasional mudstone occurrences . 4.2. Model 2 Model 2 considered the same parameters as Model 1 Table 1 , with the exception of the time for carbonate deposition, for which a longer run time of 2.4 My was used, which corresponds to an increase of 8X in the run time for carbonate deposition in relation to that of Model 1. It produced an approximately 8 times decrease in the carbonate depositional rate in relation to that of Model 1. The carbonate depositional rate was 0.6 mm y in Model 1 and 0.08 mm y in Model 2. It is worth noting that although Curve 1 in Model 1 and Curve 2 in Model 2 describing lake level oscillations are the same, they cover however different time spans Curve 1 describes lake level oscillations from 113.3 to 113 My, whereas Curve 2 describes lake level oscillations from 115.4 to 113 My Fig. 7 . However, the response of Model 2 in reproducing the carbonate stacking pattern and lateral facies distribution was not satisfactory when compared to the well data. The generated accommodation space was exaggerated, because subsidence takes place over a larger time span, thus creating larger accommodation space. Therefore, laminite and grainstone facies did not develop Fig. 12 . In addition, there was an over-thickened final deposition of stromatolite facies in certain portions of the carbonate platform, which generated an anomalous carbonate platform geometry Fig. 12 . 4.3. Model 3 In Model 3, we used the same carbonate depositional rate of 0.08 mm y and 2.4 My run time as those of Model 2 Table 1 . However, a gently decreasing lake level oscillation curve Curve 3 was applied to the model. The trend of decreasing lake bathymetry towards the top of the model Fig. 7B was used in order to decrease the accommodation space generated in Model 2 and to generate more evaporitic environmental conditions in comparison to those of Models 1 and 2. The results obtained from Model 3 show similarities with the occurrence of the facies in the well data Fig. 13 and the overall carbonate thickness across the entire platform. In a few simulated wells, the carbonate thickness was exceeded well C in Fig. 13 wells B and E in Fig. 9 . From the distribution of the carbonate facies D. Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 88 2017 676e695 685 Fig. 7. Lake-level oscillation curves used in the models, as reconstructed based on the carbonate facies analyses of the available well data curve 1 orange was used in Model 1, curve 2 blue was used in Model 2 curve 3 pink was used in Model 3 and curve 4 green was used in Model 4. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. Fig. 8. Graphical representations of the non-dimensional coefficient of deposition efficiency ranging from 0 the facies will not settle to 1 the facies will settle with 100 efficiency . A e Coefficients for models 1, 2 and 3. B - Coefficient for Model 4. LMT - laminite GST - grainstone STR - stromatolite SPH - spherulitite. Table 1 Variable modeling parameters used during the simulations of Models 1 to 4. MODEL Run time My Lake level oscillation curve Subsidence rate mm y Carbonate depositional rate mm y 1 2 3 4 0.3 2.4 2.4 2.4 1 2 3 4 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.6 0.08 0.08 0.08 proportion across the platform and the simulated facies model Fig. 14 , we observed i occurrences of laminite and grainstone facies in the shallower central portion of the platform, ii a predominance of stromatolite facies at the edge of the platform and iii a predominance of spherulitites in the deeper and low energy portions of the lake. Fig. 15 shows the evolution of the facies model in Model 3 and its correlation with lake level oscillations. In the initial map, there is a predominance of hybrid facies Fig. 15A . As the lake level increases with corresponding increases in the accommodation space , stromatolites begin to develop Fig. 15B . With the progressive increase in lake level, low energy conditions are established, and spherulitites begin to form across the platform Fig. 15C . When the lake level falls again, adequate conditions for the development of stromatolite facies return. The continuous fall of this lake level also favors the appearance of grainstones and laminites Fig. 15D . As occurred in Model 2, a combination of humidity and increase in accommodation space lead to optimal lake level conditions for stromatolite and grainstone deposition Fig. 15E . At the end 113My , grainstones and laminites predominate, pointing to drier conditions in the lake Fig. 15 F . 4.4. Model 4 As the main difference when compared to the other models, model 4 was meant to simulate the occurrences of grainstones and stromatolites at shallower lake depths and proximal positions along the depositional profile grainstones occurring from 1 to 10 m 686 D. Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 88 2017 676e695 Fig. 9. Correlation between the simulated facies from Model 1 and Model 3, with the observed overall facies organization on wells A, B and E. The dotted red line represents the final simulated deposition. LL 1 4 lake level. GST - grainstone STR - stromatolite. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. depth, and stromatolites occurring from 10 to 30 m depth Fig. 8 B . Therefore, in order to reproduce stronger evaporation conditions than those of Model 3, it was necessary to enhance the lake level regressive trend by the application of Curve 4 Fig. 7B otherwise, the deposition of stromatolite facies would dominate throughout the entire thickness of the simulated wells. By applying a stronger lake level regressive trend, the simulation of Model 4 resulted in the deposition of laminites and reworked sediments in the upper sedimentary succession and a very thick layer of spherulitite at the base of the wells Fig. 16 . In terms of the distribution of the carbonate facies proportions across the carbonate platform, Fig. 17 shows that laminite and grainstone facies were deposited in the shallower central portion of the platform, a stromatolite facies was deposited in the central portion and edge of the platform, and a spherulitite facies was deposited mostly in the deeper and low energy portions of the platform, together with the occurrence of mudstones facies. However, the laminite production was very incipient in Model 4 and does not correspond to observations. It is worth noting that the changes in the bathymetric lake level applied to Model 4, which were intended to simulate the occurrences of grainstones and stromatolites facies, significantly modified the results in comparison to those of Model 3. The resulting facies model also shows that there is a predominance of spherulitite facies spreading across the platform and throughout most of the stratigraphic succession Fig. 17 , being interbedded with stromatolite levels towards the top of the succession, whereas a predominance of grainstone facies occurs at the end of the carbonate depositional cycle. 5. Discussion The integration of the data analysis and stratigraphicsedimentological forward modeling results leads to some topics for discussion i the main structural and stratigraphic aspects of the studied Aptian carbonate platform, ii the roles of some environmental parameters in the carbonate platform deposition, and iii the proposal of a conceptual depositional model for the Aptian carbonate reservoir of the Santos basin focused on in this study. 5.1. Main structural and stratigraphic aspects of the studied Aptian carbonate platform The seismic analysis shows that reflectors corresponding to the base and top of the Aptian carbonate sequence are cut by NE-SW normal faults Fig. 5 . They intercept the entire carbonate sequence and even the base of the salt layer indicated by the black circle in Fig. 5A . From the results of the structural restoration section 3.1.2 , we observe that after the displacements of the major faults are D. Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 88 2017 676e695 687 Fig. 10. Simulation results of Model 1, illustrating the simulated 3D lake level volume the simulated lake level variation LL the simulated facies proportion Simu and the observed facies proportion Well for well C . The dotted red line represents the final simulated deposition. The correlations of the occurrences of facies from the simulation result and well data are highlighted by the correlations for LMT in green , GST orange , STR in blue and SPH in pink . LMT - laminite GST - grainstone STR - stromatolite SPH spherulitite. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. restored, a horst structure remains as a structural high in the central portion of the basin Fig. 5E . Stemming from that, it can be concluded that a previous structural high existed, which influenced the depositional geometry and final overall thickness of the Aptian carbonate succession in the study area and that this is evidence of a phase or phases of pre-depositional deformation. In addition, postdepositional deformation equally occurred, as evidenced by the downward movement of the upper fault block along the plane of fault 3 and fault 1 Fig. 5C . Based on the above mentioned structural observations, it can be inferred that normal fault activity also occurred in the syn-sag stage, which was possibly generated by the reactivation of preexisting faults inherited from the rift stage of the basin. Consequently, we can infer that the carbonate platform of the sag stage of the Santos basin does not correspond to a tectonic phase of a 2007 have already noted quiescence. Indeed, Karner and Gambo that due to the lack of significant deformation, many researchers have suggested that the sag phase necessarily corresponds to a post-rift unit deposited over a thinned continental crust or oceanic crust e.g., Marton et al., 2000 Jackson et al., 2000 . However, within the Santos basin, extensional faults intercepting the sag basin s depositional units propagate upwards until the base of the evaporites, which means that the extensional deformation clearly a, 2007 . This continued until the late Aptian Karner and Gambo deformational phenomenon can be explained as a result of the displacement of the rift axis towards more distal portions of the basin until the onset of oceanic crust McKenzie, 1978 Wernicke, 1981 Lister et al., 1986 Sawyer et al., 2007 Reston and Perez , 2007 Rosenbaum et al., 2008 or by the movements of Gussinye the microblocks until the Intra-Albian that were necessary to form 688 D. Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 88 2017 676e695 Fig. 11. Final 3D facies model and 2D fence facies model representations from the simulation of Model 1 and the average proportion maps of the simulated carbonate facies. LMT laminite GST - grainstone STR - stromatolite SPH - spherulitite MUD 1 4 mudstone HBD 1 4 hybrid facies. Scale of the average proportion maps 0 blue 1 4 no facies deposition 0.3e0.5 red 1 4 main depocenter. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. Fig. 12. Simulation results for Model 2, illustrating the simulated 3D lake level volume the simulated lake level variation LL the simulated facies proportion Simu and the observed facies proportion Well for wells B and E . The dotted red line represents the final simulated deposition. LL 1 4 lake level LMT - laminite STR - stromatolite. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. o Paulo System Moulin the entire 600 km-wide Santos basin e Sa et al., 2013 Evain et al., 2015 . Therefore, whereas the quiescence prevailed in proximal portions of the margin without evident deformation which actually characterizes the sag phase , the rift distal portions remained active locally, being able to continuously generate small fault movements in intermediate areas such as that D. Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 88 2017 676e695 689 Fig. 13. Simulation results for Model 3 the simulated 3D lake level volume the simulated lake level variation LL the simulated facies proportion Simu and the observed facies proportion Well for well C . The dotted red line represents the final simulated deposition. The correlations of the occurrences of facies from the simulation results and well data are highlighted by the correlations for LMT in green , GST in orange , STR in blue and SPH pink . LMT - laminite GST - grainstone STR - stromatolite SPH - spherulitite. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. of the study area. 5.2. Main environmental parameters controlling the carbonate platform deposition according to the simulated models According to the results of the stratigraphic-sedimentological forward models, the carbonate depositional rate and lake level oscillations are the main parameters that control the final stacking pattern and lateral distribution of the Aptian carbonate facies in the Santos basin. 5.2.1. Carbonate depositional rate The carbonate depositional rate is the most effective modelbased parameter for controlling the final thickness of the carbonate platform. As shown by the simulations of all the models section 4 , by varying the carbonate depositional rates in a setting of constant subsidence rate equal to 0.05 mm y, after Contreras et al., 2010 , the final carbonate layer thickness was equally variable. The applied carbonate depositional rates of 0.6 mm y for a 0.3 My depositional time and 0.08 mm y for a 2.4 My depositional time proved to be the best simulated value to fit to the models to successfully reproduce the approximate original 100-m-thick Aptian carbonates. However, it is worth emphasizing that during simulations of stratigraphic-sedimentological models, the orders of magnitude of depositional rates observed in analogues must be respected Krumbein et al., 1977 Chivas et al., 1990 Pentecost, 2005 Last et al., 2010 . In this sense, although the origin of the carbonates of the studied platform is unknown, the carbonate depositional rates used in the models, which were either 0.6 mm y or 0.08 mm y, correspond to a small depositional rate that is most commonly attributed to a carbonate environment under major microbial influence. Specifically, in Model 1, although the short deposition time 0.3 My was considered to simulate abiotic deposition conditions, the depositional rate required to reach the carbonate thickness observed in the wells corresponds to a small deposition rate typical of greater microbial influence. 5.2.2. Lake level oscillations induced by climate conditions Considering the constant rate of subsidence used in the present 690 D. Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 88 2017 676e695 Fig. 14. Final 3D facies model and 2D fence facies model representations from the simulation of Model 3 and the average proportion maps of the simulated carbonate facies. LMT laminite GST - grainstone STR - stromatolite SPH - spherulitite MUD 1 4 mudstone HBD 1 4 hybrid facies. Scale of the average proportion maps 0 blue 1 4 no facies deposition 0.3e0.5 red 1 4 main depocenter. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. study, the results of Models 1 to 4 show that the application of distinct curves of lake level oscillations controls the base level variations and, therefore, the accommodation space for carbonate deposition. Accordingly, during simulations, the different applied curves control the carbonate facies deposition in each simulated time step due to the dependence between facies deposition and lake depths. In Models 3 and 4, the use of Curve 3 and Curve 4, respectively Fig. 7B , resulted in a general regressive trend of the lake bathymetry from the base to the top of the simulated depositional succession for example, see Model 3 in Fig. 15 , being thus equivalent to a depositional environment under more arid climate conditions than those of the previous Models 1 and 2. However, Curve 4 imposed even more abrupt evaporation rates on Model 4. In fact, the arid climate conditions simulated in Models 3 and 4 are in accordance with the climate conditions proposed by Karner a 2007 for the final infilling of the rift lakes of the and Gambo South Atlantic rifted margins also in Chaboureau et al., 2012, 2013 . According to those authors, the regional exposure and truncation of the upper pre-salt section of the South Atlantic attest to a decline in lake levels induced by arid climate conditions during the Aptian. Arid climate conditions alone would provide a simple mechanism to generate shallow water environments for the precipitation of evaporites throughout the rift system of the African and Brazilian conjugate continental margins. 5.3. Conceptual model proposed for the deposition of the carbonate platform 5.3.1. General considerations In the case of the studied Aptian carbonate platform of the Santos basin, a large number of related environmental, depositional and oceanographic data are unknown. In this study, 3D stratigraphic-sedimentological forward modeling provided an D. Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 88 2017 676e695 Fig. 15. Carbonate facies evolution of Model 3 and its correlation with lake level variations. LMT 1 4 laminite, GST 1 4 grainstone STR 1 4 stromatolite SPH 1 4 spherulitite MUD 1 4 mudstone HBD 1 4 hybrid facies. opportunity to test a variety of unknown depositional parameters in order to put forward possible depositional scenarios for the carbonate platform. It is worth mentioning, however, that due to a question of differences in the resolution levels of the well data and simulations layers time steps and simplified depositional laws, stratigraphic-sedimentological forward modeling can very rarely replicate in detail both the proportions and frequencies of facies occurrences seen in actual well data. The original and exact sediment thickness of a layer will hardly be exactly reproduced the same way as observed in all wells, and one or another well will therefore inevitably not be fully respected. Nonetheless, in the present study, a fair reproduction of facies distribution and overall organization as shown in well data was successfully achieved through the modeling. However, it was observed that by increasing the time steps did not result in significant increase of detailing. From the integration of all the results, we were able to analyze all the models in terms of the resulting stacking pattern and lateral facies distribution. Although important for an overall approach to the role of depositional parameters in the simulation results, Models 1, 2 and 4 were dismissed when regarding the proposition of a conceptual model. We could thus indicate Model 3 and the related set of model-base depositional parameters, which best replicated the carbonate platform as indicated from the seismic data, structural restoration and facies analyses. 691 5.3.2. Tentative models 1, 2 and 4 Although Model 1 was able to reproduce the carbonate overall organization as observed in the well data, it could not replicate the sediment thicknesses measured on the wells sections see simulated well A of Model 1 in Fig. 9 . In addition, it produced the very same proportion of stromatolites across the entire carbonate platform, which was approximately 30 Fig. 11 , and was thus not in accordance with the well facies data analyses. In Model 2 the carbonate overall organization and lateral facies distribution obtained from the simulations were not satisfactory when compared to the well data Fig. 12 . An excess of accommodation space was generated, and as a consequence, laminite and grainstone facies could not develop. Model 4 considered that stromatolite growth was limited to a maximum lake depth of 30 m Fig. 8B . However, the use of Curve 4 Fig. 7B , which imposed a strong tendency of decreasing the lake bathymetry, resulted in a more restricted accommodation space in comparison to that of Model 3 Figs. 13 and 16 . In addition, grainstone facies tended to dominate the upper portion of the simulated well sections Fig. 17 , which is not in accordance with the very dry lake conditions expected to have occurred at the end of the carbonate depositional cycle. In addition, the spread of the spherulitite facies across the entire platform generated a thick layer of such facies Fig. 16 in the model, which is not observed in well sections. In fact, an extensive layer of spherulitite facies would be expected in the case of the occurrence of a regional flooding phase of lakes in fact, the low amplitude peak in the seismic data just above the horizon interpreted as the base for the carbonate succession in seismic data Fig. 5A has been interpreted in this study as a presumed spherulite facies anomaly . In terms of hydrocarbon industry production, a thick layer of spherulitite may represent a permeability barrier to the communication between reservoir facies due to the low permo-porous quality typical of spherulitite rich in magnesium clay, unless those spherulitite undergo some diagenetic alteration such as dissolution. However, the confirmation of a presumed lake flooding marker would have to be verified across nearby portions of carbonate platforms in other wells. This permeability barrier can also be validated by comparing facies model data with the production data responses. 5.3.3. Model 3 e a conceptual model proposed to explain the development of the Aptian carbonate platform Model 3 replicated the overall organization observed in the wells and reached the sediment thickness across the entire simulated carbonate platform. In some wells, the thickness of the final simulated well section was larger than those observed in the drilled wells Figs. 9 and 13 . The thicker depositional succession is the result of the generation of a larger accommodation due to a longerterm subsidence acting in Model 3 in comparison to that in Model 1. Nevertheless, Model 3 is considered to produce the best fit to explain the development of the Aptian carbonate platform because only that model produced the carbonate sediment thicknesses observed in the stratigraphic wells across the entire platform, even if the simulated sediment thicknesses exceeded the observed values in some wells Figs. 9 and 13 . The simulated over-thickened deposition of carbonates may be geologically justified if we consider subsequent erosion and or compaction, or even changes in depositional rates due to environmental variations, which would lead to decreases in the original carbonate depositional thicknesses. It is also worth noting that an arid climate was previously proposed to have prevailed during the rifting of the Santos basin at the end of the carbonate deposition e.g., Petri, 1987 Brownfield and Charpentier, 2006 Chaboureau et al., 2012 , as indicated by the presence of the thick overlying salt layers that point to growing evaporation precipitation rates towards the final carbonate 692 D. Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 88 2017 676e695 Fig. 16. Simulation results for Model 4, illustrating the simulated 3D lake level volume the simulated lake level variation LL the simulated facies proportion Simu and the observed facies proportion Well for well C . The dotted red line represents the final simulated deposition. The correlations of the facies occurrences from the simulation results and well data are highlighted by the correlations for LMT in green , GST in orange , STR in blue and SPH in pink . LMT 1 4 laminite GST 1 4 grainstone STR 1 4 stromatolite SPH 1 4 spherulitite. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. depositional cycle. Curve 3 applied to Model 3 resulted in gradually increasing arid climate conditions from the base to the top of the simulated well successions. In terms of the carbonate facies distribution and carbonate facies proportions across the carbonate platform Fig. 14 , Model 3 also corroborates the conceptual deposition model previously adopted by the oil industry to explain the Aptian carbonate platforms in the Santos basin, which was based on data from the Salta basin in Argentina e.g., Pedrinha, 2014 . This is attested by i the occurrence of laminite facies and grainstones in the shallower central portion of the lake, ii stromatolites located at the edge of the platform, and iii the predominance of spherulitite in the deeper portions of the lake. Those attestations mean that, according to our models, the conceptual model proposed for the carbonate platform of the Santos basin seems to be a coherent model to explain the evolution of the studied carbonaceous platform. Through Model 3, we could therefore understand the facies distribution and evolution of the carbonate platform in response to changes in the lake level Fig. 15 and the interdigitation between reservoir and non-reservoir facies for future production predictions for the oil industry. Taking into consideration the discussion above, we consider that the following depositional parameters used in Model 3 are capable of explaining the evolution of the studied Aptian carbonate platform i a maximum initial lake depth of 60 m ii depositional interval of 2.4 My iii growing arid climate conditions towards the top of the carbonate depositional cycle iv constant subsidence rate of 0.05 mm y v a carbonate depositional rate of 0.08 mm y and vi the occurrence of grainstone and stromatolite facies respectively between 5-20 m and 15e60 m depths. 6. Conclusions Stratigraphic-sedimentological forward modeling simulations D. Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 88 2017 676e695 693 Fig. 17. Final 3D facies model and 2D fence facies model representations produced from the simulation of Model 4 and the average proportion maps of the simulated carbonate facies. LMT - laminite GST - grainstone STR - stromatolite SPH - spherulitite MUD 1 4 mudstone HBD 1 4 hybrid facies. Scale of the average proportion maps 0 blue 1 4 no facies deposition 0.3e0.5 red 1 4 main depocenter. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. of the studied carbonate platform allowed the selection of the main depositional parameters that have most influenced the lacustrine carbonate deposition of the studied platform. According to the model that best replicated the studied carbonate platform Model 3 , the main parameters are carbonate depositional rate and lake level oscillation. Carbonate depositional rate has proven to be the most important modeling parameter for controlling the final thickness of the approximate 100-m-thick Aptian carbonate platform. Accordingly, Model 3 equally allowed us to forward a proposed depositional rate of 0.08 mm y for the lacustrine carbonate deposition in the Santos basin. Lake-level oscillation also proved to be the most effective environmental parameter for defining the generation of accommodation space and the deposition of distinct carbonate facies in the lake depth intervals. Lake-level oscillation presented itself as a parameter that most effectively controlled the carbonate facies lateral distribution in response to imposing arid climate conditions on the depositional system. Finally, the availability of a coherent conceptual depositional model that controls facies interpolations between data points across the entire studied carbonate platform also helps in reducing uncertainties for the prediction of reservoir facies distribution along the carbonate stratigraphic sequence. The results of the present study may also serve as a basis for testing other possible depositional models for this carbonate platform, modeling other platforms inserted in similar depositional contexts, and future studies of diagenetic models. Acknowledgments This work was undertaken as part of a Master of Science dissertation carried out at the Graduate Program in Oceanography at the State University of Rio de Janeiro PPG-OCN UERJ . The 694 D. Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 88 2017 676e695 authors greatly acknowledge the Brazilian National Agency of Petroleum e ANP and PETROBRAS for the data release. We would also like to thank BEICIP-FRANLAB, Brazil, for providing an educational license for the DIONISOS software program to the Faculdade de Oceanografia UERJ . We would also like to thank Dr. Peter Szatimari, Dr Marina Rabineau, and a third anonymous reviewer for their constructive critiques and valuable advice, which greatly improved the overall quality of this paper. References Beck, R., Andreassen, J.-P., 2010. Spherulitic growth of calcium carbonate. Cryst. Growth Des. 10 7 , 2934e2947. o estratigr o das seque ncias Bento Freire, E., 2012. Caracterizac a afica em alta resoluc a rias de origem microbiana do intervalo paleoce nico da Formac calca ao Yacoraite ncia Balbuena IV na regi Seque ao de Salta - Argentina. 2012. Thesis Master . ncias, Universidade Federal do Rio de Curso de Geologia, Instituto de Geocie Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, p. 243. Bourdarot, G., Khemissa, H., Al Shemsi, A., Murat, B., Richet, R., Games, F., Porcher, F., 2014. Sedimentology genetic modeling of an offshore Abu Dhabi carbonate reservoir. In Abu Dhabi International Petroleum Exhibition and Conference. Society of Petroleum Engineers. Brownfield, M.E., Charpentier, R.R., 2006. Geology and total petroleum systems of the west-central coastal province 7203 , West Africa. U.S. Geol. Surv. Bull. 2207-B, 1e52. Carminatti, M., Wolff, B., Gamboa, L., 2008. New exploratory frontiers in Brazil. In Proceedings of the 19th World Petroleum Congress. Madrid, Sapin, June 29-July 3, 2008, p. 11. dimentologie des stromatolites holoce nes Casanova, J.O.E.L., Thouin, C., 1990. Biose ol. Fr. 6 du lac Tanganyika Burundi . Implications hydrologiques. Bull. Soc. Ge 4 , 647e656. Casanova, J., Hillaire-Marcel, C., 1992. Late Holocene hydrological history of Lake Tanganyika, East Africa, from isotopic data on fossil stromatolites. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 91 1 , 35e48. Chafetz, H.S., Butler, J.C., 1980. Petrology of recent caliche pisolites, spherulites and speleothem deposits from central Texas. Sedimentology 27, 497e518. Chang, H.K., Kowsmann, R.O., Figueiredo, A.M., 1990. Novos conceitos sobre o o desenvolvimento das bacias marginais do leste brasileiro. In Origem e evoluc a de bacias sedimentares. Petrobras, Rio de Janeiro, pp. 269e289. Chang, H.K., Kowsmann, R.O., Figueiredo, A.M.F., Bender, A., 1992. Tectonics and stratigraphy of the East Brazil Rift system an overview. Tectonophysics 213 1 , 97e138. Chaboureau, A.C., Donnadieu, Y., Sepulchre, P., Robin, C., Guillocheau, F., Rohais, S., 2012. The Aptian evaporites of the South Atlantic a climatic paradox Clim. Past 8 3 , 1047e1058. Chaboureau, A.C., Guillocheau, F., Robin, C., Rohais, S., Moulin, M., Aslanian, D., 2013. Paleogeographic evolution of the central segment of the south Atlantic during Early Cretaceous times paleotopographic and geodynamic implications. Tectonophysics 604, 191e223. Chivas, A.R., Torgersen, T., Polach, H.A., 1990. Growth rates and Holocene development of stromatolites from Shark Bay, western Australia. Aust. J. Earth Sci. 37 2 , 113e121. Cohen, A.S., Talbot, M.R., Awramik, S.M., Dettman, D.L., Abell, P., 1997. Lake level and paleoenvironmental history of Lake Tanganyika, Africa as inferred from late Holocene and modern stromatolites. Bull. Geol. Soc. Am. 109, 444e460. dt, T., 2010. Seismic stratigraphy and Contreras, J., Zu hlke, R., Bowman, S., Bechsta subsidence analysis of the southern Brazilian margin Campos, Santos and Pelotas basins . Mar. Petrol. Geol. 27 9 , 1952e1980. gica e estratigr Dias, J.L., 1998. An alise sedimentolo afica do andar aptiano em parte das Malvinas considerac o es sobre as da margem leste do Brasil e no Plato es e ingresso es marinhas do Oceano Atla ntico Sul Meridional, primeiras incurso 208 pp. Thesis PhD . Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre. Dorobek, S., Piccoli, L., Coffey, B., Adams, A., 2012. Carbonate rock-forming processes in the pre-salt sag successions of Campos Basin, offshore Brazil evidence for seasonal, dominantly abiotic carbonate precipitation, substrate controls, and broader geologic implications. In In AAPG Hedberg Conference Microbial Carbonate Reservoir Characterization . June 4-8, 2012 e Houston Texas, p. 2. Evain, M., Afilhado, A., Rigoti, C., Loureiro, A., Alves, D., Klingelhoefer, F., Schnurle, P., Feld, A., Fuck, R., Soares, J.E., Lima, M.V., Corela, C., Matias, L., Benabdellouahed, M., Baltzer, A., Rabineau, M., Viana, A., Moulin, M., o Paulo plateau system, Aslanian, D., 2015. Deep structure of the Santos basin-Sa SE Brazil. J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 120 8 , 5401e5431. http dx.doi.org 10.1002 2014JB011561 online 26 AUG 2015. Garcia-Ruiz, J.M., 2000. Geochemical scenarios for the precipitation of biomimetic inorganic carbonates. In Grotzinger, J.P., James, N.P. Eds. , Carbonate Sedimentation and Diagenesis in the Evolving Precambrian World, vol. 67. Society for Sedimentary Geology, Special Publications, Tulsa, OK, USA, pp. 75e89. Granjeon, D., 1996. Modelisation stratigraphique deterministe conception et applications d un modele diffusif 3 D multilithologique, 280 pp. Thesis. PhD . de Rennes 1, Rennes. Universite Granjeon, D., Joseph, P., 1999. Concepts and Applications of a 3D Multiple Lithology, Diffusive Model in Stratigraphic Modeling, Numerical Experiments in Stratigraphy Recent Advances in Stratigraphic and Sedimentologic Computer Simulations. SEPM Society for Sedimentary Geology , Tulsa, pp. 197e210. Grotzinger, J.P., Knoll, A.H., 1999. Stromatolites in Precambrian carbonates evolutionary mileposts or environmental dipsticks Annu. Rev. earth Planet. Sci. 27, 313e358. Hawie, N., Barrois, A., Marfisi, E., Murat, B., Hall, J., El-Wazir, Z., Al-Madani, N., Aillud, G., 2015. Forward stratigraphic modelling, deterministic approach to improve carbonate heterogeneity prediction lower cretaceous, Abu Dhabi. In In Abu Dhabi International Petroleum Exhibition and Conference. Society of Petroleum Engineers. Hodgson, W.A., 1968. The diagenesis of spherulitic carbonate concretions and other rocks from Mangakahia Group sediments, Kaipara Harbour, New Zealand. J. Sediment. Res. 38 4 , 1254e1263. Jackson, M.P.A., Cramez, C., Fonck, J.M., 2000. Role of subaerial volcanic rocks and mantle plumes in creation of South Atlantic margins implications for salt tectonics and source rocks. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 17, 477e498. a, L.A.P., 2007. Timing and origin of the South Atlantic pre-salt Karner, G.D., Gambo sag basins and their capping evaporates. In Schreiber, B.C., Lugli, S., Babel, M. Eds. , Evaporites through Space and Time, vol. 285. Geological Society, London, pp. 15e35. Special Publication. Kendall, A.C., 1977. Fasciculareoptic calcite a replacement of bundled acicular carbonate sediments. J. Sediment. Petrol. 47, 1056e1062. Krumbein, W.E., Cohen, Y., Shilo, M., 1977. Solar lake Sinai . 4. Stromatolitic cyanobacterial mats. Limnol. Oceanogr. 22 4 , 635e656. Last, F.M., Last, W.M., Halden, N.M., 2010. Carbonate microbialites and hardgrounds from Manito Lake, an alkaline, hypersaline lake in the northern Great Plains of Canada. Sediment. Geol. 225 1 , 34e49. Lawrence, D.T., Doyle, M., Aigner, T., 1990. Stratigraphic simulation of sedimentary basins concepts and calibrations. Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Bull. 74 3 , 273e295. Lister, G.S., Etheridge, M.A., Symonds, P.A., 1986. Detachment faulting and the evolution of passive continental margins. Geology 14, 246e250. McKenzie, D., 1978. Some remarks on the development of sedimentary basins. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 40 1 , 25e32. Marton, L.G., Tari, G.C., Lehmann, C.T., 2000. Evolution of the Angolan passive margin, West Africa, with emphasis on post-salt structural styles. In Mohriak, W., Talwani, M. Eds. , Atlantic Rfts and Continental Margins. Geophysical Monographs, vol. 115, pp. 129e149. Meister, P., Johnson, O., Corsetti, F., Nealson, K.H., 2011. Magnesium inhibition controls spherical carbonate precipitation in ultrabasic springwater Cedars, California and culture experiments. In Reitner, J., Queric, N.-V., Arp, G. Eds. , Advances in Stromatolite Geobiology. Springer, Berlin, pp. 101e121. todos Mio, E.D., 2005. Modelagem crustal da Bacia de Santos pela integrac ao de me ncias da Universidade geofi sicos, 94 pp. Thesis Master . Instituto de Geocie Estadual Paulista, Rio Claro, S ao Paulo. Montaggioni, L.F., Borgomano, J., Fournier, F., Granjeon, D., 2015. Quaternary atoll development new insights from the two-dimensional stratigraphic forward modelling of Mururoa Island Central Pacific Ocean . Sedimentology 62 2 , 466e500. Moreira, J.L.P., Madeira, C.V., Gil, J.A., Machado, M.A.P., 2007. Bacia de Santos. ncias da Petrobras, Rio de Janeiro vol. 15 2 , 531e549. Boletim de Geocie Moulin, M., Aslanian, D., Unternehr, P., 2010. A new starting point for the history of the Equatorial and South Atlantic. Earth Sci. Rev. 98, 1e37. http dx.doi.org 10.1016 j.earscirev.2009.08.001. Moulin, M., Aslanian, D., Rabineau, M., Patriat, M., Matias, L., 2012. Kinematic keys of the SantoseNamibe basins. In Conjugate Divergent Margins, vol. 369. Geological Society, London, pp. 91e107. http dx.doi.org 10.1144 SP369.3. Special Publications. Moulin, M., Aslanian, D., Rabineau, M., Patriat, M., Matias, L., 2013. Kinematic keys of the SantoseNamibe basins. Geol. Soc. Lond. Spec. Publ. 369 1 , 91e107. fica em depo sitos lacustres maastrichtianos da Pedrinha, S., 2014. An alise estratigra Formac ao Yacoraite Bacia de Salta-Argentina definic ao e rastreabilidade de ncias de alta resoluc a o, 150 pp. Thesis Master . Curso de Geologia, seque ncias e Cie ncias Exatas, Universidade Estadual Paulista Ju lio Instituto de Geocie de Mesquita Filho , Rio Claro, S ao Paulo. Pentecost, A., 2005. Travertine, 445 pp. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. Pereira, M.J., Macedo, J.M., 1990. A Bacia de Santos perspectivas de uma nova provi ncia petroli fera na plataforma continental sudeste brasileira. Bol. Geo ncias Petrobras, Rio de janeiro 4, 3e11. cie Petri, S., 1987. Cretaceous paleogeographic maps of Brazil. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 59, 117e168. Quirk, D.G., Hertle, M., Jeppesen, J.W., Raven, M., Mohriak, W.U., Kann, D.J., Norgaard, M., Howe, M.J., Hsu, D., Coffey, B., Mendes, M.P., 2013. Rifting, subsidence and continental break-up above a mantle plume in the central South Atlantic. Geol. Soc. Lond. Spec. Publ. 369 1 , 185e214. , M., 2007. Lithospheric extension from rifting to contiReston, T.J., Perez-Gussinye nental breakup at magma-poor margins rheology, serpentinisation and symmetry. Int. J. Earth Sci. 96, 1033e1046. Riding, R., 2008. Abiogenic, microbial and hybrid authigenic carbonate crusts components of Precambrian stromatolites. Geol. Croat. 61 2e3 , 73e103. Rosenbaum, G., Weinberg, R.F., Regenauer-Lieb, K., 2008. The geodynamics of lithospheric extension. Tectonophysics 458, 1e8. Rosendahl, B.R., Reynolds, D.J., Lorber, P.M., Burgess, C.F., McGill, J., Scott, D.L., Lambiase, J.J., Derksen, S.J., 1986. Structural expressions of rifting lessons from D. Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 88 2017 676e695 Lake Tanganyika, Africa. Geol. Soc. Lond. Spec. Publ. 25 1 , 29e43. Saller, A., Rushton, S., Buambua, L., Inman, K., McNeil, R., Dickson, J.T., 2016. Presalt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola. AAPG Bull. 100 7 , 1135e1164. Sawyer, D.S., Coffin, M.F., Reston, T.J., Stock, J.M., Hopper, J.R., 2007. COBBOOM the continental breakup and birth of oceans mission. Sci. Drill. 5, 13e25. Schroeder, J.H., 1972. Fabrics and sequences of submarine carbonate sequences in Holocene Bermuda cup reefs. Geol. Rundsch. 61, 708e730. Szatmari, P., Milani, E.J., 2016. Tectonic control of the oil-rich large igneouscarbonate-salt province of the South Atlantic rift. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 77, 567e596. Terra, G.G.S., Spadini, A.R., Franca, A.B., Sombra, C.L., Zambonato, E.E., da Silva Juschaks, L.C., Arienti, L.M., Erthal, M.M., Blauth, M., Franco, M.P., Matsuda, N.S., Carramal da Silva, N.G., Moreti Junior, P.A., D Avila, R.S., Souza, R.S., Tonietto, S.N., Anjos, S.M.C., Campinho, V.S., Winter, W.R., 2010. Classificacao de rochas carbonaticas aplicavel as bacias sedimentares brasileiras. Bol. 695 Geociencias Petrobras 18, 9e29. Verrecchia, E.P., Freytet, P., Verrecchia, K.E., Dumont, J.-L., 1995. Spherulites in calcrete laminar crusts biogenic CaCO3 precipitation as a major contributor to crust formation. J. Sediment. Res. A65 4 , 690e700. Warrlich, G., Bosence, D., Waltham, D., Wood, C., Boylan, A., Badenas, B., 2008. 3D stratigraphic forward modelling for analysis and prediction of carbonate platform stratigraphies in exploration and production. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 25 1 , 35e58. Wernicke, B., 1981. Low-angle normal faults in the Basin and Range province nappe tectonics in an extending orogen. Nature 291, 645e648. White, N.J., Jackson, J.A., McKenzie, D.P., 1986. The relationship between the geometry of normal faults and that of the sedimentary layers in their hanging walls. J. Struct. Geol. 8, 897e909. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2015. An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates. Geol. Soc. Lond. Spec. Publ. 418 1 , 209e219.

[END_OF_PAPER]

Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Marine and Petroleum Geology journal homepage www.elsevier.com locate marpetgeo Spatiotemporal hierarchy of fault systems and associated syn-rift stratigraphic sequences across the Santos Basin, offshore SE Brazil Peryclys Raynyere de Oliveira Andrade a,b,d, , Tiago M. Alves d , Ma rio Neto Cavalcanti de Arau jo e , Renata da Silva Schmitt b,c , Daniel Galva o Carnier Fragoso f,h,i , Anderson Henrique de Melo g a Reservoir Geomechanics and Structural Geology Group, Petrobras, Rua Henrique Valadares, 28 - Torre B - 6 andar, Centro, Rio de Janeiro, CEP 20231-030, RJ, Brazil Programa de Po s-Graduac a o em Geologia, IGEO. Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Av. Athos da Silveira Ramos, 274 - Cidade Universita ria, Ilha do Funda o, Rio de Janeiro, CEP 21941-916, RJ, Brazil c Departamento de Geologia - Bloco G, Secretaria do PPGL, sala G1-037, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Av. Athos da Silveira Ramos, 274 - Cidade Universita ria - Ilha do Funda o, Rio de Janeiro, CEP 21941-916, RJ, Brazil d 3D Seismic Lab, School of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Cardiff University, Main Building, Park Place, Cardiff, CF10 3AT, United Kingdom e CENPES Research Center, Petrobras, Av. Hora cio de Macedo, 950, Ilha do Funda o, Rio de Janeiro, CEP 21941-915, RJ, Brazil f Petrobras University, Petrobras, Rua General 25 Canabarro, 500, Maracana , Rio de Janeiro, CEP 20271-900, RJ, Brazil g Deep Water Reservoirs, Petrobras, Av Elias Agostinho, 665, IMBETIBA, Macae , CEP 27913-350, RJ, Brazil h Programa de Po s-graduac a o em Geologia, Instituto de Geocie ncias, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais - IGC-UFMG, Av. Anto nio Carlos 6627, Pampulha, Belo Horizonte, CEP 31270-901, MG, Brazil i Laborato rio de Estudos Tecto nicos LESTE , Instituto de Cie ncia e Tecnologia, Universidade Federal dos Vales do Jequitinhonha e Mucuri - UFVJM, Rodovia MGT-367, 5000, Minas Gerais, Diamantina, CEP 39100-000, MG, Brazil b A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T Keywords Santos Basin Tectono-stratigraphy Fault hierarchy Rifted margins Syn-rift sequence hierarchy Sequence stratigraphy This paper uses high-resolution 2D and 3D seismic surveys tied to stratigraphic data from 155 boreholes in the mapping and hierarchization of 1551 extensional faults across the Santos Basin and its Outer High. These faults were able to control deposition in extensional basins with different ages they are thus classified into three 3 main systems with the aim of understanding their geodynamic significance. Fault system 1 FS1 controlled the oldest syn-rift sequence and delimits the very first half-graben basins developed during an Early Rift stage. Fault System 2 FS2 was formed in response to crustal thinning during an Intermediate rifting stage. Fault System 3 FS3 responded to the migration of the rift axis towards the distal margin in a Late Rift stage. Strikingly, fault reactivation occurred throughout the entirety of the proximal domain of the Santos Basin during the Late Rift Stage. This work is important as each interpreted fault system is understood to have controlled the availability of accommodation space during its peak activity, thereby shaping the inner proximal, outer proximal, and distal domains of the Santos Basin. The evolution of these fault systems also resulted in the deposition of syn-rift se quences that obey a specific order, or ranking. By correlating fault systems with their adjacent syn-rift strata, we propose 1st-order sequence boundaries that are associated with each stage of the development of the Santos Basin, formed as a consequence of changes in thermo-mechanical conditions during the evolution of rifted margins. Identified 2nd-order sequences are attributed to tectonic movements at the crustal-block scale. In contrast, stratigraphic sequences of the 3rd- and 4th-orders are associated with localised tectonic inputs. Within this framework, we use stratigraphic surfaces as structural markers across multiple observational scales. Consequently, sequence 1SEQ1 corresponds to the stretching phase, standing for the initial stages of rifting within an intraplate setting. Sequence 1SEQ2 relates to the necking stage and formation of the outer proximal domain, whereas sequence 1SEQ3 accompanied the development of the distal domain in the so-called hyper extension and continental-breakup stages. Ultimately, this work demonstrates that the tectono-stratigraphic evolution of continental margins, from the onset of rifting to continental breakup, is documented by a clear, Corresponding author. E-mail addresses peryclysandrade petrobras.com.br P.R.O. Andrade , AlvesT cardiff.ac.uk T.M. Alves , mario Arau jo petrobras.com.br M.N.C. de Arau jo , schmitt geologia.ufrj.br R. da Silva Schmitt , galgeo gmail.com D.G.C. Fragoso , andersonhm petrobras.com.br A.H. de Melo . https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2025.107384 Received 8 July 2024 Received in revised form 7 March 2025 Accepted 12 March 2025 Available online 17 March 2025 0264-8172 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 diachronic tectono-stratigraphic record. Such a record varies along and across hierarchized fault systems that are developed at multiple scales of observation. 1. Introduction 2. Data and methods Reconstructing the geometry, genesis, and evolution of syn-rift ba sins is key to understanding how continental margins are formed and progress towards their continental-breakup stage Lovecchio et al., 2024 . Yet, gaps in the stratigraphic record are still common in sedi mentary basins that record multiphase extensional episodes, such as SE Brazil s. This is due to the combined effects of vertical tectonic move ments, interactions amongst local-scale structures such as fault linkage points and step-overs, and geodynamic processes acting on the larger continental-margin scale Gresseth et al., 2023 Osmundsen and Pe ron-Pinvidic, 2018 Redfield and Osmundsen, 2013 . Moreover, syn-rift tectonics can persist after continental breakup is achieved, including in deep-offshore basins of SE Brazil where it supposedly led to the reactivation of pre-existent extensional structures at different times and with varying magnitudes Alves et al., 2023 Lei et al., 2019 Soares et al., 2012 . All these aspects stress the fact that a continental margin s architecture impacts its reservoir successions and, consequently, the compartmentalization and fluid migration in these same reservoirs, regardless if one is considering oil and gas extraction, carbon storage or geoenergy solutions Brackenridge et al., 2023 Fisher et al., 2023 Jackson et al., 2024 Konstantinovskaya et al., 2023 Siler, 2023 Ven tisky and Gilfillan, 2023 . A vast suite of seismic and borehole data acquired across the Santos Basin and its Outer High, offshore SE Brazil, is used in this work to investigate the relationship between tectonic structures and their sedi mentary record Fig. 1 . Comprising some of the largest Pre-salt hy drocarbon fields in SE Brazil e.g. Tupi, Bu zios, Mero, Atapu, and Berbiga o-Sururu , the Outer High is crucial to characterize the spatio temporal evolution of rifted continental margins as it was the locus of new 3D seismic and drilling campaigns in the 2020s. Through the detailed analysis of a comprehensive seismic and borehole dataset, this works addresses the following research questions 2.1. Seismic and borehole data The seismic data in this work comprise a suite of 3D volumes and regional 2D profiles Figs. 1 and 2 . Three-dimensional 3D volumes include the depth-converted 0262-Alto Cabo Frio, 0302-Tambau-Uru gua-Tambuata, R0264-Santos-6a-libra, R0282-Santos Cluster, and R0302-Franco Fig. 2b . These seismic data are complemented by stratigraphic and wireline data from 155 exploration and production wells, some of which are shown in Fig. 2c. A total of nine 9 seismic horizons and 1551 faults are interpreted in the study area. Regional ION-GXT seismic profiles 2D are used to fit the more local interpretation of 3D seismic data into a broader, margin-wide scale of observation. The ION-GXT seismic data - acquired by the Bra silSpan Project - consist of pre-stack depth profiles migrated using the Kirchoff algorithm Kumar et al., 2013 . All seismic and borehole data were provided by ANP, Brazil s National Agency of Petroleum, Natural Gas and Biofuels Fig. 2 . 2.2. Data interpretation workflow 2.2.1. Structural interpretation Fault systems were identified in this work based on the recognition and mapping of their structural styles, geometries, magnitudes of displacement, orientations, the superposition of deformation and kine matic relations and relative ages. Their temporal relationships with respect to the sedimentary infill of adjacent syn-rift basins were addressed by mapping how each fault system controlled the growth and thinning of strata within specific seismic-stratigraphic sequences. Hence, the main criterion used to separate fault systems was the relative age of growth strata in discrete basins and sub-basins the faults were responsible for Fig. 3 . This included the recognition of a fault displacement and cross-cutting geometries, and b stratigraphic se quences truncated by both local and regional unconformities. The original geometries of faults and syn-rift strata, when deformed by tec tonic movements, were useful in interpreting their relative ages and kinematic histories e.g. Haupert et al., 2016 Nemc ok, 2015 Osmund sen and Pe ron-Pinvidic, 2018 Peacock et al., 2000 . 1 What is the role of rifted margins architecture, and associated fault systems, in the depositional and stacking histories of syn-rift sequences 2 How do the dimensions and relative timings of fault systems relate to the syn-rift stratigraphic record of the Santos Basin 3 How have stratigraphic sequences responded to the geodynamic evolution of the Santos Basin in the context of SE Brazil s rifting and continental breakup 2.2.2. Seismic-stratigraphic interpretation To delimit and hierarchize stratigraphic sequences we combined the sequence stratigraphic principles in Catuneanu 2022, 2019a, 2019b , Catuneanu et al. 2011, 2010 , Fragoso et al. 2022, 2021 , Magalha es et al. 2021, 2020 , with the structural geology concepts regarding the superposition of deformation and kinematic relations with the concepts of structural geology that underpin structural analysis, e.g. Birrell and Courtier, 1999 Delvaux et al., 1997 Fournier and Petit, 2007 Lisle, 1992, 2004 Lisle and Leyshon, 2004 Marrett and Allmendinger, 1990 Petit, 1987 Price and Cosgrove, 1990 Rowland et al., 2007 . The aim was to establish a genetic relationship whereby the stratigraphic record responds to tectonic stimuli. On rifting continental margins, the stratigraphic record at the largest scale is hierarchically classified as being of the 1st-order. According to Catuneanu 2022, 2019b and Catuneanu et al. 2011, 2010 , a 1st-order sequence must represent relatively conformable successions in the sense that internal unconformities do not disrupt its tectonic significance, nor the continuity of a basin s palaeogeographic evolution. In the case of sedimentary basins recording multiple tectonic events, the limits of 1st-order sequences denote changes in basin type and are the most sig nificant within a sedimentary succession, regardless of the time interval This paper characterizes and hierarchizes the stratigraphic sequences and related fault systems that make up the Santos Basin near its Outer High, offshore SE Brazil Fig. 1 . It addresses the spatial and temporal evolution of faults and strata from a geodynamic point of view by considering 1st- to 4th-order stratigraphic sequences as having responded to syn-rift tectonics imposed at different scales of observation. We therefore propose a novel temporal and spatial classification for faults developed on rifted continental margins. This new classification high lights the role of each fault system in controlling syn-rift topography and sediment accommodation space across different scales of observation. The main advantage of such a workflow is that it allows one to change between scales of observation, while maintaining similar structural stratigraphic criteria and references. 2 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 Fig. 1. Regional maps of SE Brazil s continental margin. a Relative location of the study area plotted on the Brazilian Geological Map at the 1 100000 scale CPRM, 2004 . Onshore, the pink colours denote the Precambrian basement, while green tones mark the limit of the Parana Basin Paleozoic . The Global Magnetic Anomaly map of Maus et al., 2009 is shown for the offshore area of SE Brazil. Dashed black lines highlight the location of the onshore Floriano polis FLTZ , Curitiba CURTZ and Rio de Janeiro RJZT transfer zones, as originally defined in Pereira and Macedo 1990 . The narrow yellow mesh shows the offshore prolongation of the Rio de Janeiro Transfer Zone RJTZ as proposed in Stanton et al. 2010 . The wide light-green dashed lines denote the offshore continuation of the Helmut Transfer Zone HTZ Dehler et al., 2016 . b Free-air gravity anomaly and c GEBCO-2020 bathymetric maps for the study area, both adapted from Xu et al. 2024 . The black dashed ellipse in b shows the location of the Santos External High. SB, Santos Basin CB, Campos Basin ESB, Espi rito Santo Basin PB, Pelotas Basin SPP, Sa o Paulo Plateau CFH, Cabo Frio High FH, Floriano polis High CSDZ, Cruzeiro do Sul Deformation Zone CL, Caprico rnio Lineament VCL, Vito ria-Colatina Lineament VTSC, Vito ria-Trindade Seamounts Chain JCS, Jean Charcot Seamounts ASS, Almirante Saldanha Seamounts SPR, Sa o Paulo Ridge SPP, Sa o Paulo Ridge AR, Abimael Failed Ridge VC, Vema Channel RGR, Rio Grande Rise FFZ, Floriano polis Fracture Zone MVFZ, Martins Vaz Fracture Zone RJFZ, Rio de Janeiro Fracture Zone RJFZ, Rio Grande Fracture Zone. Acronyms in the figures are adapted from Xu et al. 2024 , Schmitt et al. 2023, 2008 and Mohriak 2020 . 3 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 recorded between two consecutive events Fig. 4 . Thus, an internal hierarchization of the larger depositional sequences in our study area was completed after we set up the 1st-order limits of syn-rift strata. Later, any observed relationships between tectonic stimuli and stratigraphic responses to such stimuli were explained at different scales, resulting in the identification of specific fault systems Fig. 4 . Such a method allowed us to change between different scales of observation during our tectono-stratigraphic interpretation. Setting up a low-resolution stratigraphic framework at the 1st-order scale enabled a better positioning of the boundaries of higher-resolution 2nd-, 3rd-, and 4th-order sequences within our seismic-stratigraphic framework. Additionally, this same sequence-stratigraphic framework allowed us to coherently change our observations across multiple scales Catuneanu, 2019a, 2019b, 2022 Fragoso et al., 2021, 2022 Magalha es et al., 2020, 2021 , as the higher-ranked sequences 1st-order modulate the lower-ranked sequences i.e. those with a higher 2nd-to 4th-order frequency . By following such an approach, we investigated each domain of the rifted margin of the Santos Basin as the final expression of Fig. 2. Regional map showing the location of a the interpreted 2D and 3D seismic data, and b the 155 exploration boreholes tied to the seismic data in this work. The study area is highlighted by a grey polygon. The position of arbitrary lines and wells is shown in the inset c . 4 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 distinct tectonic contexts, and events. These events relate to the past thermo-mechanical conditions of the Santos Basin, which were disparate enough to generate contrasting 1st-order sequences, similarly to what was proposed in Chenin et al. 2022 . In comparison, 2nd-order se quences responded to tectonic movements at an intermediate scale be tween continental and the local scale. Local interactions amongst fault systems and stratigraphic sequences are known to be dynamic, resulting in complex syn-rift architectures and the development of 3rd- to 4th-or der stratigraphic sequences Alvarenga et al., 2021 Holz et al., 2017 Martins-Neto and Catuneanu, 2010 Wescott et al., 1996 . In this work, we restrict the scope of the terms syn-tectonic and posttectonic to the local scale. Similarly, the terms wedge-shaped and sag do not carry a genetic connotation tied to stages of active tectonism and thermal subsidence as proposed in McKenzie 1978 they simply represent the external geometries of the depocentres in which strata were accommodated. Due to the inherent complexity of the Santos Basin, we subsequently chose to describe its structural framework in terms of fault systems rather than focusing on specific fault segments, as explained in the following sections. study area, and b the Outer High of the Santos Basin, located in a central position relative to the Sa o Paulo Plateau Fig. 1b and c . The Cabo Frio High contains a suite of igneous rocks spanning three 3 magmatic events 1 a first event within the Camboriu Formation, 2 a second event recorded by the intrusion of Campanian-Turonian basalts, though poorly represented throughout the Santos Basin, and 3 a third episode recording the emplacement of Upper Paleocene-Eocene diabases and extrusive volcaniclastics Mizusaki et al., 1992 Mizusaki and Thomaz Filho, 2004 . In comparison, the Outer High is elongated in a NE-SW direction and shows relatively thin sediments oceanwards when compared to the proximal domain of the Santos Basin Gomes et al., 2012 . Due to their specific gravimetric and magnetic signatures, basement terrains outcropping along the coast of SE Brazil have been previously considered to extend beneath the Santos Basin Dehler et al., 2016 Gordon et al., 2023 Grac a et al., 2019 Stanton et al., 2010, 2019 . Hence, the NE-SW strike of these basement terrains likely influenced the location and geometry of normal faults in offshore syn-rift basins. In fact, the study area is underlain by the Ribeira Belt, composed of amalgamated Precambrian terrains that are interspersed with NE-SW anastomosing shear zones and magmatic intrusions Heilbron et al., 2000, 2017 Schmitt et al., 2016, 2018, 2023 . This basement control on syn-rift structures was recorded from the onset of intraplate rifting up to its final rifted-margin configuration which, in the Santos Basin, was established at the start of the Albian Arau jo et al., 2023 Karner, 2000 Schmitt et al., 2023 . 3. Geological background 3.1. Physiography of the Santos basin and underlying basement terrains The Santos Basin is delimited to the north by the Cabo Frio High, in its proximal sector, and by the Jean Charcot seamounts in its distal sector. To the south, its limit is given by the Floriano polis High Fig. 1 . The central part of the basin is characterized by its significant magnetic and gravimetric anomalies e.g. Galva o and de Castro, 2017 Grac a et al., 2019 Xu et al., 2024 Yin et al., 2024 , which are separated by a transfer zone that is parallel to the eastern limit of the basin Fig. 1a and b . Two key physiographic features should be highlighted due to their proximity to the study area a the Cabo Frio High, to the north of the 3.2. Stratigraphy of the Santos basin The syn-rift stratigraphy of the Santos Basin gained new importance after the discovery of giant pre-salt fields offshore Brazil in the early 2000s Fig. 2 . Initially, Moreira et al. 2007 considered a tectono-sedimentary evolution for the basin that comprises three Fig. 3. Relative chronology amongst fault systems in the Santos Basin. a Schematic fault chronology. Depocentres are diachronous but offset by the youngest black fault occurring in phase 3. In a.i black fault offsets the oldest blue fault formed in phase 1, which is also offset by the red fault formed in phase 2. In a.ii the fault generated in phase 3 offsets the fault formed in phase 2. b Schematic fault classification in this work, with Fault System 2 used as an example. Synchronous faults formed during the same tectonic event distribute deformation in the basin in such a way that primary faults accumulate most of deformation and limit secondary and small-scale faults. 5 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 distinct phases Rift Valanginian to Aptian , Post-rift Aptian , and Drift Albian to Holocene , as illustrated in Fig. 5. According to Moreira et al. 2007 , the Rift Phase includes the Camboriu Formation near its base, a Hauterivian unit essentially composed of basaltic flows Rio da Serra and Aratu stages Fig. 5 . These basalts are overlain by the Pic arras Formation, which includes alluvial fan deposits. Conglomerates and polymictic sandstones with basalt, quartz, and feldspar fragments represent proximal facies in such a formation. Sandstones, siltstones, and talc-stevensitic shales Mg-clays occur more distally in lacustrine depocentres Moreira et al., 2007 . The Itapema Formation covers the Pic arras Formation and is composed of bivalve rudstones and grain stones coquinas Fig. 5 . For Moreira et al. 2007 the lower boundary of the Rift sequence is the Intra-Barremian unconformity at 126.4 Ma, commonly referred to as the Pre-Jiquia Unconformity, or PJU. Its upper boundary is the base of the Alagoas unconformity at 117 Ma, also known as the Pre-Alagoas unconformity PAU in the Campos Basin Fig. 5 . The post-rift sequence of Moreira et al. 2007 includes the Barra Velha and Ariri formations, respectively the Pre-salt reservoir and evaporite intervals of SE Brazil Moreira et al. 2007 Fig. 5 . Deposi tional environments alternated between continental and shallow marine in the lower part of the Barra Velha Formation, and document conditions of significant environmental stress. Resultant depositional facies include microbial limestones, stromatolites, and laminates in proximal parts of basins, with shales becoming predominant in more distal areas. Grainstone and packstones composed of stromatolite fragments and associated bioclasts ostracods are also present. These carbonates can be partially or completely dolomitized. The upper part of the Barra Velha Formation records the deposition of microbial limestones inter bedded with shales. These are stromatolitic limestones and microbial laminates, locally dolomitized. Depositional facies once more included sandstone- and conglomerate-rich alluvial fans in proximal parts of the Santos Basin, which transition into alternating continental and shallow marine deposits that reflect significant environmental stress in more distal parts of the basin Fig. 5 . For Moreira et al. 2007 , the end of the post-rift sequence comprises the Ariri Formation with its Upper Aptian salt equivalent to the upper Alagoas stage . Generally, the Ariri Formation is composed of halite and anhydrite. However, the presence of more soluble evaporites such as tachyhydrite, carnallite, and locally sylvinite has been documented in some boreholes, e.g. 3-RJS-625 in Moreira et al. 2007 . These evapo rites are followed by the Drift Supersequence, named by Moreira et al. 2007 as a way to group the strata deposited above the Top Salt un conformity, i.e. after 110 Ma. The Drift megasequence proposed by Moreira et al. 2007 comprises a set of deep-water carbonates, sand stones and mudstones reflecting stratigraphic cycles affected by important salt tectonics. Nevertheless, at the broad scale of the Santos Basin, depositional facies varied according to major transgressive and regressive cycles Chang et al., 1992 Mohriak and Rosendahl, 2003 . A Fig. 4. Schematic representation of the criteria used in this work to hierarchically divide syn-rift stratigraphic sequences. a Proximal syn-tectonic stratal geometries filling syn-tectonic half grabens. b Distal syn-tectonic stratal geometry in which sediment fills triangular zones that subside during the rotation of crustal blocks, onlapping and truncating older sequences. c Proximal post-tectonic geometry in which low-angle onlap and erosional truncation are formed between depocentres with a sag-like geometry. 6 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 Fig. 5. Lithostratigraphic units for the Santos Basin based on the work of Moreira et al. 2007 . IAU Intra-Alagoas Unconformity 117 Ma PAU Pre-Alagoas Unconformity 123 Ma PJU Pre-Jiquia Unconformity 126 Ma Top Basalt 130 Ma . CAM - Camboriu Formation PIC - Pic arras Formation ITP - Itapema Formation BE - Barra Velha Formation ARI - Ariri Formation. On the right-hand column of the figure 1 Stratigraphic framework proposed by Moreira et al. 2007 , with the Drift phase omitted as it is not studied in this paper. 2 Stratigraphic framework of Buckley et al. 2015 , Barnett et al. 2021 , and Minzoni et al. 2021 . 3 Stratigraphic framework of Karner and Gambo a 2007 , Torsvik et al. 2009 and Moulin et al. 2013 . 4 Stratigraphic framework proposed by Adriano et al. 2022 . 5 According to our interpretation, the 1st-order sequence 1SEQ3 coincides with the Late Rift phase of Adriano et al. 2022 , but the limits of the sequences 1SEQ2 and 1 SEQ1 are slightly different from those proposed by the latter authors. Instead, we propose a pre-rift interval that correlates with the Camboriu formation of Moreira et al. 2007 to position sequence 1SEQ1 between 130 Ma Rift Onset and 123 Ma, i.e. encompassing the Pic arras and Itapema formations in Moreira et al. 2007 . more detailed description of the supra-salt succession can be found in Modica and Brush 2004 . Some authors favour a different interpretation for the stratigraphic position and significance of the top of the Rift sequence. For example, Buckley et al. 2015 , Barnett et al., 2021a,b and Minzoni et al. 2021 suggest that the lower part of the Barra Velha Formation Fig. 5 reflects the syn-rift stage, and is followed by a phase of passive subsidence encompassing the upper Barra Velha and Ariri Formations. Conversely, authors like Karner and Gambo a 2007 , Torsvik et al. 2009 , and Moulin et al. 2013 propose that the syn-rift stage extends into the evaporitic Ariri Formation, thus also including the lower Barra Velha Formation in this syn-rift episode Fig. 5 . Alves et al. 2020 considered this last phase of passive subsidence on the proximal margin as clearly tectonically driven on the distal margin, thus reflecting progressive S-N continental breakup in SE Brazil all part of a breakup stratigraphic sequence. Finally, seismic-stratigraphic interpretations in Adriano et al. 2022 to propose a syn-rift context divided into three phases Early Rift, Upper Rift, and Late Rift, as illustrated in Fig. 5. For the sake of simplicity, the stratigraphic interval of interest in this work ranges be tween 135 Ma and 110 Ma in age. We numbered the 1st-order sequences in Adriano et al. 2022 propose a syn-rift context divided into three phases Early Rift, Upper Rift, and Late Rift, as illustrated in Fig. 5. For the sake of simplicity, the stratigraphic interval of interest in this work ranges between 135 Ma and 110 Ma Fig. 5 . We numbered the 1st-order sequences in Adriano et al. 2022 in a different way 1SEQ1 to 1SEQ3 and sub-divided their Early Rift sequence in Pre-rift and 1SEQ1 Fig. 5 . The Santos Basin witnessed several magmatic cycles from Val anginian times to the Eocene, yet revealing a wide-ranging distribution of igneous rocks in its interior. Gordon et al. 2023 undertook a review of magmatic cycles in the basin relative to the geodynamic processes that occurred during the evolution of the SE Brazil. The first magmatic cycle occurred between c. 135 Ma and 132 130 Ma during the rift-onset stage, and is documented by a coastal dike swarm and associated alka line provinces Ferreira et al., 2023 . The second cycle includes syn-rift 132 130 to 123 Ma and post-rift 123 113-112 Ma magmatic rocks. The third cycle comprises drift or post-continental breakup magmatic rocks that are Lower Cretaceous to Lower Cenozoic in age 110 40 Ma . According to Geraldes et al. 2013 and Gordon et al. 2023 , magmatism during the drift stage appears to have been still controlled by tectonics, as magmatic bodies are preferentially aligned with crustal discontinuity lines. All magmatic cycles rift-onset, syn post-rift and drift show variations in magmatic volume, the morphology of igneous edifices, and their locations, when moving from the south to the cen tre north of the Santos Basin. 3.3. Geodynamic framework The geodynamic evolution of SE Brazil during the Early Cretaceous has been explained by the hyperextended-margin model of authors such as Blaich et al. 2011 , Karner 2000 , Karner and Driscoll 1999 , Pe ron-Pinvidic et al. 2017 and Zala n et al. 2011 . Seismic-reflection and gravity-inversion data led some authors to interpret the Santos Basin as part of a hyperextended, magma-poor continental margin, in which the upper crust behaved rigidly while the lower crust experienced stretching and the formation of irregular necking zones at its base Dehler et al., 2016 Grac a et al., 2019 Stanton et al., 2010, 2019 Yin et al., 2024 . According to such models, the lower crust adopted a boudin-like geometry before mantle exhumation ensued Blaich et al., 2011 Pe ron-Pinvidic et al., 2017 Zala n et al., 2011 . However, seismic refraction data in Evain et al. 2015 have excluded the presence of exhumed mantle in the Santos Basin, leading to its subdivision in four distinct zones, or domains 1 inner proximal margin, 2 outer prox imal margin, 3 distal margin, and 4 oceanic domain, see Arau jo et al. 2023 . These domains are marked by significant changes in crustal thickness, which are themselves accompanied by changes in syn-rift structural style similar to those described for the NW Iberian and Adria margins Manatschal and Bernoulli, 1999 . Near the Santos Outer High, crustal extension in the initial phases of continental rifting was characterized by the existence of a 10 15 km thick crust populated by rotated blocks bounded by oceanward-dipping faults, most of which soled out in the lower crust Blaich et al., 2011 Gomes et al., 2012 Pe ron-Pinvidic et al., 2017 Zala n et al., 2011 . This crustal arrangement responded to the lateral migration of the rift axis towards the Benguela African side under particular rheological conditions, i.e. the lower crust was weak enough to allow lateral rift migration, but too strong for massive flow Arau jo et al., 2023 . 7 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 caption on next page 8 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 Fig. 6. Structural maps of key stratigraphic markers highlighting the geometry and distribution of main fault systems. The maps reveal the sigmoidal pattern of fault systems in the study area. a Fault System 1 FS1 , mapped on the top pre-rift sequence 130 Ma horizon. b Fault System 2 FS2 , interpreted on the top 1SEQ2 123 Ma horizon. c 3D view of the unconformity separating 1SEQ1 and 1SEQ2 123 Ma with Fault System 2 FS2 imaged in the figure. Vertical exaggeration is 3x. d Fault System 3 FS3 , mapped over 1SEQ3 base of Aptian salt . Primary and secondary FS3 faults are based on the interpretation of regional ION-GXT lines, as there are no 3D seismic data on the distal margin. In b , the grey rectangle highlights the rhombic shapes generated by interacting small-scale faults pink colour , primary and secondary faults. In d , note the elevated position of transfer zones relative to the lows depocentres around them. 1 - Tupi High 2 - Sururu Low 3 - Se pia Low 4 - Iracema Transfer zone IRATZ 5 - Atapu-Bu zios Low 6 - Libra Low 7 - Libra Transfer Zone LBTZ 8 - Tambau -Urugua Low North Depocentres - Central Kitchen 9 - West Cabo Frio Low Main Depocentre - Cabo Frio Kitchen 10 - Cabo Frio High 11 - Jupiter High. 4. Hierarchy of syn-rift stratigraphic sequences Adriano et al., 2022 . Sequence 1SEQS2 is isopachous in the inner proximal domain of the Santos Basin, showing parallel internal re flections and strata onlapping against the margins of sag-shaped depocentres Fig. 7 . In contrast, near the oceanward edge of the outer proximal domain, 1SEQ2 fills half-graben basins that were formed above rotating crustal blocks delimited by large normal faults Figs. 7 and 8 . The change in depocentre geometry from well-developed half-grabens to sag-like sub-basins - recorded as a 1st-order stratigraphic surface that can be mapped throughout the study area - marks the boundary between 1SEQ1 and 1SEQ2 Figs. 7 and 8a . Against this backdrop, the Outer High of the Santos Basin is interpreted to represent a piece of the upper crust detached from the inner proximal domain and offset by normal faults that delimit internal, rotated crustal blocks. The youngest 1st-order sequence 1SEQ3 correlates with the Late Rift stage of Adriano et al. 2022 and was deposited during the last stages of extension as the axis of rifting migrated oceanwards. It reveals a sag-type geometry in the proximal domain of the basin, but is clearly synchronous with syn-tectonic growth strata in the distal domain Figs. 7 and 8d . As a result, the boundary between 1SEQ2 and 1SEQ3 is marked by a low-angle unconformity in the proximal domain but com prises a prominent angular unconformity in the distal domain Figs. 7 and 8 . The original position and internal geometry of 1SEQ3 have been modified by halokinesis in the distal domain of the Santos Basin Alves et al., 2017 . However, in some distal depocentres the fraction of salt that remained immobile may sometimes retain a sag-type geometry Fig. 8d . Therefore, we consider that the top of 1SEQ3 correlates with the top of the original salt unit at the time of its deposition. This event marks the end of the rifting process as suggested by Karner and Gambo a 2007 , Torsvik et al. 2009 , Moulin et al. 2013 , and Adriano et al. 2022 . 4.1. Pre-rift sequence The expression of the structural paleo-relief, unrestored, at the top of the pre-rift sequence records the 1st-order stratigraphic surface that marks the beginning of syn-rift extension Fig. 6a . Although the pre-rift sequence was interpreted as being of the 1st-order Fig. 7 e Fig. 8c , the increase in stratigraphic resolution resulting from the high-quality 3D data interpreted in this work, allowed for a better characterization of the pre-rift sequence - towards the 2nd-order scale - for the whole of the Santos Basin Fig. 9 . The pre-rift sequence shows sub-parallel internal seismic reflections that likely span from the Valanginian c. 135 Ma to the early Hau terivian 130 Ma in age. The pre-rift sequence is also isopachous, especially near the Bu zios field, while being unconformable over the Precambrian basement Fig. 9a and b . The sequence is detected in the seismic volumes shot over the Bu zios and Tupi fields, as well as in some of the depocentres surrounding the latter, but rarely over the Mero field Fig. 11a and b . Our interpretation thus favours an onset of continental rifting during the early Hauterivian 130 Ma , i.e. after the deposition of the pre-rift sequence, which is essentially a pre-tectonic interval in the Santos Basin. Despite its pre-tectonic character, expressed by its sub-parallel and isopachous internal reflections, several authors consider the correlative Camboriu Formation as part of the Rift stage e.g. Adriano et al., 2022 Barnett et al., 2021a,b Buckley et al., 2015 Karner and Gambo a, 2007 Minzoni et al., 2021 Moulin et al., 2013 Torsvik et al., 2009 . However, considering it as a syn-rift interval causes important contradictions in geodynamic terms. If one considers the Camboriu Formation as the offshore expression of the Serra Geral magmatism, or ultimately a by-product of the Trista o da Cunha plume Lovecchio et al., 2024 , one must interpret it as a syn-rift interval. To do so, one must consider that the extrusion of lava in the Serra Geral Formation occurred in response to adiabatic decompression at the start of continental rifting, shortly after the generalized phase of thermal uplift that accompanied the intrusion of a mantle plume. In this work, we chose to strictly adhere to the seismic expression of the Camboriu Formation within the sequence hierarchical criteria of Catuneanu 2022 , Catuneanu et al. 2011, 2010 , and thus interpret it as a pre-rift sequence sensu Prosser 1993 . 4.3. 2nd-order sequences A structural palaeo-relief map of three main surfaces bounding 2ndorder sequences - where their boundaries also coincide with the boundaries of 1st-order sequences - is shown in Fig. 6. The sigmoidal geometry of fault systems, the degree of continuity of faults, plus the spatial arrangement and different ages of stratigraphic sequences in Fig. 6 reveal how useful 2nd-order sequences are as structural markers. On seismic profiles, 2nd-order sequences fill depocentres that were formed during the relative motion of crustal blocks Fig. 9 . Thus, se quences 2SEQ1 to 2SEQ2 were preserved just above pre-rift strata, and angular truncations mark the contact between the two latter sequences and pre-rift strata yellow arrows in Figs. 10 and 11 . Posing this, sequence 2SEQ1 fills sets of asymmetric half-grabens with growth strata in their interior. It generally fills rotated depocentres that were eroded and truncated on top by a well-marked angular unconformity created by 2SEQ2. Importantly, sequence 2SEQ1 is not observed oceanwards from the Mero-Bu zios Block, and is also absent in the distal domains of the basin Fig. 9 . Sequence 2SEQ2 extends across the entire internal and external proximal domains, once again filling half-graben basins formed over rotated crustal blocks Fig. 9 . Sequence 2SEQ2 can also be distin guished from 2SEQ1 by the fact it fills relatively large and broad depocentres Fig. 9 . In parallel, 2SEQ2 is discordant over 2SEQ1 despite also showing growth strata against normal faults in FS2. In the inner 4.2. 1st-order sequences The upper boundary of the pre-rift sequence in the proximal domain of the Santos Basin was adopted as the reference horizon marking the onset of crustal extension in the study area Fig. 6a . Hence, a 1st-order stratigraphic sequence 1SEQ1 characterized by the presence of growth strata filling relatively small half-grabens is observed above the pre-rift sequence Fig. 7 . The observed growth strata in 1SEQ1 correlates with the Early Rift and early part of the Upper Rift successions defined in Adriano et al. 2022 . In this context, half-graben basins with growth strata are predominantly identified in the inner proximal domain and in some parts of the Outer High, i.e. within the outer proximal domain Fig. 8a and b . Sequence 1SEQ2 reveals two distinct stratal geometries in both the inner proximal domain and the western portion of the outer proximal domain. It was deposited at the end of the Upper Rift stage of Fig. 5 9 P.R.O. Andrade et al. 10 Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 Fig. 7. ION-GXT profiles 0600 1600 and 1350 revealing the present-day architecture of the Southeast Brazilian Margin. The profiles are shown with vertical exaggeration of 2.5x. a Uninterpreted seismic profile. b Interpreted profile showing main faults and corresponding 1st-order sequences. Note the clear crustal thinning towards the distal margin and the rooting of primary faults near the base of the upper crust. Also note that 1st-order sequences stack from the proximal to the distal domain, in the same direction as the rift-axis migration, a character that results in changes in their average dip 27.5 for 1SEQ1, 7.5 for 1SEQ2, and 2 for 1SEQ3 sequence. Primary faults delineate crustal blocks, while secondary faults limit internal highs. Key stratigraphic surfaces Rift Onset Unconformity ROU c. 135 Ma Rift onset 130 Ma Early Barremian Synrift Unconformity EBSRU 126 Ma , Late Barremian Synrift Unconformity LBSRU 123 Ma , Intermediate Aptian Synrift Unconformity MASRU 117 Ma , Late Aptian Early Albian Syn-rift Unconformity LASRU 112 Ma and Breakup Unconformity BU 110 Ma . Stratigraphic surfaces are named after Arau jo et al. 2023 . CC indicates the presence of a metamorphic core complex at depth. P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 caption on next page 11 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 Fig. 8. Seismic profiles showing the infill, onlap downlap terminations, and truncation geometries amongst 1st-order syn-rift sequences. a 1SEQ1 and 1SEQ2 are separated by an angular unconformity that marks a major change in stratal geometry. Sequence 1SEQ1 shows a divergent pattern against border faults it is thus syntectonic , whereas 1SEQ2 is composed of isopachous strata onlapping the basin shoulders, all in all revealing a sag-like post-tectonic geometry. Also note the relative age relationships between fault systems, with FS1 being rotated and cross-cut by FS2. b FS2 reactivates FS1 and, consequently, 1SEQ2 also shows a divergent fill against basin-shoulder faults. c Seismic profile imaging a metamorphic core complex where part of 1SEQ1 is in contact with the lower crust. Highlighted are primary faults synchronous with 1SEQ2, offsetting the entire sedimentary column and connected to the base to an anastomosed, ductile shear zone in the lower crust. A prominent angular truncation between 1SEQ1 and 1SEQ2 is observed in seismic data. d Low-angle onlaps and erosional truncation separating 1st-order sequences 1SEQ2 and 1SEQ3 in the proximal domain of the Santos Basin, as also observed in a and b . In the distal domain, a clearer unconformity is observed due to more pronounced tectonic activity, as shown in d . The salt unit is also offset by underlying faults and fills the resulting accommodation space. On this same profile, 1SEQ2 progressively disappears laterally towards the more distal parts of the margin, while 1SEQ3 shows a syn-tectonic stratal geometry. See caption in Fig. 7 for a description of main stratigraphic boundaries. proximal domain, 2SEQ2 can rest directly on top of interpreted lower crust rocks, as highlighted in Fig. 9. In the inner and outer proximal domains, 2SEQ3 is the first to comprise, at a regional scale, depocentres filled with strata denoting a post-tectonic sag-type geometry Figs. 10 and 11 . Yet, it still shows a syn-tectonic geometry in the distal domain where the accommodation space created between faulted, rotating crustal blocks was totally filled by growth strata see area highlighted by an orange rectangle from 400 km to 550 km in Fig. 9-b . The stratigraphic boundary separating 2SEQ2 and 2SEQ3 coincides with the most prominent angular unconformity in the proximal domain see blue arrows in Fig. 10 . In the inner proximal domain, 2SEQ3 onlaps the first order unconformity that separates 1SEQ1 from 1SEQ2 see blue arrows in Fig. 10 . At the landwards shoulder of the inner proximal domain, 2SEQ3 continues westwards, onlapping the basement and relatively older strata see grey rectangle near 50 km in Fig. 9 . Such a character reveals that 1st- and 2nd-order sequence boundaries are amalgamated at the western tip of the internal proximal domain, but they form separate unconformities towards local depocentres in the east, i.e. oceanwards Figs. 7 and 9 . Low-angle truncations separating 2SEQ3 and 2SEQ4 were observed in line B-B between 10 km and 70 km see the red arrows in Fig. 10 . Here, 2SEQ3 forms tighter synclines than 2SEQ4, and also below it, generating shallow-angle truncations in strata near 40 km in Fig. 10-b . This same pattern is repeated between 2SEQ4 and 2SEQ5, with shallowangle truncations and onlap terminations separating the two sequences see the white arrows in Figs. 10 and 11 , a character best observed in depocentres where accommodation space for sediment was quickly generated. Geometric differences in 2nd-order sequences are therefore interpreted as documenting overlapping deformation events. In other words, discrete deformation pulses were responsible for renewed, rapid rates in accommodation-space creation and subsequent lows were filled by correlative strata. Thus, high positive accommodation rates pre dominated in depocentres, whereas low positive accommodation rates occurred over structural highs, resulting in the omission and erosion of relatively older sequences Fragoso et al., 2021 . A key example of this process occurs in the Tupi field between wells W21 and W27, where 2SEQ3 and 2SEQ4 are absent. At this same time, faults that delimit the internal highs of the outer proximal domain were capable of juxtaposing sequences of distinct ages, as highlighted by the yellow ellipses in Fig. 11a and b. In summary, 2SEQ3 and 2SEQ4 fill the arched, deformed palae otopography that was generated at the top of 1SEQ1, and thus onlap this latter unit see blue arrows in Fig. 10 . Similarly, but revealing an angular relationship that is less clear, 2SEQ5 fills the basin lows resulting from the synclinal arching of 2SEQ4, also onlapping the latter 2nd-order sequence see white arrows in Figs. 10 and 11 . These struc tural and strata relationships allow us to use them as markers for the riftclimax stage sensu Prosser 1993 in the proximal domain of the Santos Basin. Importantly, such a relative chronology is observed throughout the entire proximal domain but is even clearer in evolving depocentres where the stratigraphic surfaces tend to be more separated, in contrast to their adjacent structural highs. On these highs, unconformities tend to amalgamate and materialize important depositional hiatuses. Adding to our interpretation, 1SEQ3 comprises two 2nd-order sequences, 2SEQ5 and 2SEQ6. The oldest sequence 2SEQ5 is inter preted on regional ION-GXT profiles crossing the distal domain, where it fills the accommodation space generated by the rotation of crustal blocks Fig. 9 . Above 2SEQ5, a thick evaporite succession 2SEQ6 was still deposited synchronously with the movement of the faults delimiting some of the crustal blocks in the distal domain. On regional 2D profiles, 2SEQ5 is not clearly identified in the proximal domain but, by nar rowing the scale of observation, it can still be recognized in 3D seismic data Figs. 10 and 11 . It is also more readily interpreted north of the Bu zios field, where reflections in 2SEQ5 onlap the top of 2SEQ4. 4.4. 3rd-order sequences Third-order sequences were deposited in the smallest of depocentres developed in the study area Fig. 12 and Table 1 . Sequences of this order are those in which reservoir architecture tends to be analysed. One of the best examples of 3rd-order sequences, and their bounding surfaces, is observed in a depocentre formed adjacently to the Mero field Fig. 12 . In these conditions, where depocentres provided sufficient accom modation space, 3rd-order sequences are well preserved and their bounding stratigraphic surfaces are clear in seismic data. Prograding strata were identified near structural highs in both Bu zios and Mero Fig. 13 . These geometries are generally associated with reworked strata Antunes et al., 2024 Gomes et al., 2020 and occur along the crests of local structural highs - they were interpreted as 4th-order sequences that reach thicknesses of hundreds of meters Barnett et al., 2021a,b Oliveira et al., 2021 . Their delineation is challenged by the resolution limits of the seismic data used in this work, but a more complete characterization of such features is given in Min zoni et al. 2021 . 5. Syn-rift fault systems and their temporal relationship 5.1. Early-rift fault system 1 FS1 Fault system 1 FS1 is recognized in the inner and outer proximal domains of the Santos Basin and characterized by the presence of NESW-striking normal faults Fig. 6a . Faults in FS1 are staggered and bound highly rotated, small-scale half-grabens Fig. 9 . Many of these half-grabens were offset and eventually rotated by younger fault sys tems. Our seismic data show that FS1 can be sub-divided in two sub-sets, FS1-a and FS1-b, both representing distinct degrees of fault displace ment and rotation. FS1-a represents the oldest episode of half-graben formation in the Santos Basin. Fault rotation is so prominent in FS1-a that faults can appear in sub-horizontal positions and are cross-cut by younger struc tures see numbers 1, 2 and 3 in Fig. 10 . FS1-a faults are not always easily mapped. They are only observed where angular relationships either due to the rotation of the depocentres delimited by FS1-a faults or the favourable orientation of seismic sections - are sufficiently clear. In terms of their dimensions, FS1-a faults are 1.6 5.5 km tall and 2.5 10 km long, as shown in Fig. 14. Fault System 1b FS1-b is identified in the inner and outer proximal domains of the Santos Basin, where it bounds half-grabens with a NE-SW 12 P.R.O. Andrade et al. 13 Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 Fig. 9. Seismic expression of 2nd-order sequences and their stratigraphic boundaries. Vertical exaggeration in all profiles is 2.5x. a ION-GXT profile shown in Fig. 7-b b Geometry and distribution of 2nd-order sequences revealing the age relationships between fault systems and corresponding sequences. The orange rectangle delimits a zone of syn-tectonic strata in the distal domain, where the accommodation space created between faulted, rotating crustal blocks was totally filled by growth strata. In the proximal domain, the grey rectangle denotes the onlap of the 2nd-order sequences 2SEQ3 and 2SEQ4 over the first order unconformity that separates 1SEQ1 from 1SEQ2. All these sequences are covered by 2SEQ6 salt interval . CC Metamorphic Core Complex. P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 Fig. 10. Seismic expression of 2nd-order sequences on arbitrary seismic profiles extracted from 3D seismic data highlighting the structural and stratigraphic framework of the study area. a Seismic images of the relative lows depocentres interpreted north of the Mero and Bu zios fields. b Detailed images of the structures that form the transfer zone over which the Mero and Bu zios fields are located. c Structure and morphology of the relative lows depocentres formed south of the Mero and Bu zios fields. This latter profile highlights the geometrical relationships amongst the different fault systems and syn-rift sequences. Primary faults limit secondary faults of the same age. Zooming in on the interpreted 3D seismic volumes permitted the identification of 2SEQ5 in the study area. Number 1 FS1b primary faults couple in FS1a Number 2 - FS1b primary faults cut-off FS1a faults Number 3 - FS2 primary and secondary faults offset FS1 faults. The colours and ages of faults follow the same legend as Fig. 9. The locations of arbitrary sections B-B , C-C , D-D are shown in Fig. 2. trend Fig. 6a . FS1-b differs from FS1-a by showing specific crosscutting relationships and relatively large depocentres Fig. 9 . When compared to FS1-a, faults in FS1-b are also better discerned and are more commonly linked. The lower tips of both FS1-a and FS1-b terminate in the shallow upper crust, generally coupling with basement discontinuities. Both represent primary faults Fig. 9 . In addition, the depocentres delimited by FS1-b faults bury older, aborted FS1-a depocentres, thus forming a significant angular unconformity in seismic data see yellow arrows in Figs. 10 and 11 . Only in favourable positions and angular relationships, such as when they are sub-parallel, do FS1-b faults take advantage of FS1-a to continue growing as coaxially reactivated structures see number 1 in Fig. 10 . When this condition is not met, the two sub-sets of faults cross-cut each other numbers 2 and 3 in Fig. 10 . In terms of their dimensions, FS1-b faults are 7 14 km tall and 7 km 40 km long Fig. 14-b . These faults are significantly larger than FS1-a which, together with FS-1b s apparent linkage with FS1-a, suggest the coalescence of depocentres in the study area. A scale comparison 14 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 Fig. 11. Seismic expression of 2nd-order sequences on arbitrary seismic profiles extracted perpendicularly to the Libra transfer zone. The arbitrary seismic profiles highlight major differences in palaeo-relief and accommodation space for sediment when moving from the structural highs in transfer zones position 1, Low positive accommodation rate to the basin lows position 2, High positive accommodation rate . a Arbitrary profile extracted from 3D seismic data imaging the main depocentres developed to the west of the Tupi and Bu zios fields. b Arbitrary seismic profile extracted from 3D seismic data highlighting the differences in palaeorelief and structures between the crest of a rotated block Tupi High and the transfer zone formed near the Bu zios field. c Arbitrary profile extracted from 3D seismic data across the Mero and Libra fields. Here, the interaction between primary and secondary faults in FS2 created the structural high, at the start of the Upper Rift stage, on which the two fields are located. The interpreted 3D seismic data allowed for the identification of 2SEQ5. The colours of faults and stratigraphic sequences follow the legend in Fig. 9 and Table 1. The location of arbitrary profiles E-E , F-F , G-G are shown in Fig. 2. between FS1-a and FS1-b is shown in Fig. 14c. detachment faults stopping at the top of a thick and anomalous lower crust that is in direct contact with the sedimentary cover, suggests fault propagation towards areas of active extension in the lower crust. Proving this latter interpretation, a metamorphic core complex CC was brought into direct contact with 1SEQ1 as shown in Fig. 9. Further detail about the origin of this core complex can be found in Schmitt et al. 2023 and Arau jo et al. 2023 . Faults in FS2 define the internal structure of the inner and outer proximal domains of the Santos Basin, revealing three main classes, each with distinct styles, geometries, and dimensions. Primary faults in this system are large normal detachment faults that slice through the upper crust and sole out at choke points between the upper and lower crust. 5.2. Intermediate-rift fault system 2 FS2 Fault System 2 FS2 is recognized in both the inner and outer proximal domains of the study area Fig. 6-b . In the outer proximal domain, primary faults in FS2 propagate through the upper crust to delineate crustal blocks. Because of these primary faults, FS2 defines the sigmoidal architecture of structural highs and lows that is typical of the proximal domain Fig. 9-b . These primary faults also controlled the thinning profile of the crust to create the outer proximal margin domain and its well-defined necking zone Fig. 9 . Their geometry, with 15 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 Fig. 12. Seismic expression of 3rd-order sequences in the study area. Both profiles are arbitrary composite sections extracted from 3D seismic volumes. A vertical exaggeration of 3x is used in this figure to expose low-angle erosional truncations and fault offsets. a Seismic profile crossing the Mero field from WNW to ESE dip direction . b Interpretation of the seismic profile a , stressing the presence of a depocentre formed near the Mero Field. c Seismic profile crossing the Mero field from, roughly, S to N strike direction . d Interpretation of the seismic profile in c . Note the existence of multiple depositional hiatuses over structural highs and the incomplete correlation between 3rd-order sequences in distinct depocentres. The top of 1SEQ3 is equivalent to the top salt horizon. The colours of faults systems and stratigraphic orders follow Fig. 9 and Table 1. The locations of arbitrary profiles J-J , and K-K -K are shown in Fig. 2. 16 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 Table 1 Hierarchy of stratigraphic sequences and their corresponding ages interpreted in this work. The 1st-order sequence boundaries are related to the main stages of development of rifted margins see Chenin et al. 2022 . The 2nd-order sequence boundaries are used as key structural markers in the Santos Basin, relating to the margin compartmentalization at the crustal block scale. Finally, 3rd-order sequences reflect local stratigraphic stacking patterns and basin-filling geometries. Key stratigraphic surfaces of reference Rift Onset Unconformity ROU c. 135 Ma Rift onset 130 Ma Early Barremian Synrift Unconformity EBSRU c. 126 Ma , Late Barremian Synrift Unconformity LBSRU c. 123 Ma , Intermediate Aptian Synrift Unconformity MASRU c. 117 Ma , Late Aptian Early Albian Syn-rift Unconformity LASRU c. 112 Ma and Break-up Unconformity BU c. 110 Ma . Stratigraphic surfaces are named after Arau jo et al. 2023 . faults transferring movement and forming secondary transfer zones. This is the case of the transfer zone separating the Mero and Bu zios fields, named the Libra Transfer Zone LBTZ by Carlotto et al. 2017 . Other important transfer zones are located near the Atapu, Berbiga o, and Sururu fields, herein named the Iracema Transfer zone IRATZ following Vital et al. 2023 Fig. 6c . These secondary transfer zones are internal components of the larger, regional-scale Rio de Janeiro Transfer Zone RJTZ as originally proposed by Pereira and Macedo 1990 see Fig. 1 . Although not restored in this paper, the arched palaeotopography of the RJTZ suggests distinct tectonic contexts on SE Brazil s rifted margin Fig. 6 To the south of the RJTZ, the Tupi area is marked by the presence of well-defined, rotated crustal blocks near the southern limit of the study area Fig. 10c . A similar crustal-block geometry can be recognized towards the northern part of the Santos Basin, right in front of the Cabo Frio High Fig. 10a . In between these two sectors occur the Libra and Iara transfer zones Fig. 6c and 10b . On this basis, defor mation styles change in these two transfer zones, compared to the north and south, because of strain partitioning. Well-developed faults in the north and south of the Santos Basin change to smaller structures, with abundant sub-seismic faults and fractures occurring in these transfer zones. In parallel, FS1-a and FS1-b are well preserved within the two transfer zones, where they show clearer cross-cutting geometries and, in places, an obvious relationship with FS2 Figs. 9 11 . The basal portion of these faults meets the lower crust in a splay at their lower tips, where they merge to form roots with sigmoidal ar rangements Fig. 9 . Generally, primary faults in FS2 can be up to 70 km tall and 250 km long Fig. 15a , revealing a listric geometry in cross section Fig. 9 . In terms of its relative age, FS2 overprints pre-existing faults in FS1, either cross-cutting these latter system and associated depocentres, or coalescing and reusing older faults number 1 in Fig. 10 . 5.2.1. Secondary faults in FS2 Secondary faults in FS2 compartmentalize crustal blocks but never exceed the boundaries established by primary faults Fig. 6-b . They comprise normal faults that are up to 21 km tall by 90 km long Fig. 15b . Their upper tips are nearly planar and sub-vertical but appear slightly curved at the lower tips as they are coupled with discontinuities and structures in the upper crust Figs. 9 and 10 . In the outer proximal domain Fig. 6-b and c , primary and secondary faults in FS2 are marked by stepover geometries whose displacements diminish and systematically terminate at en-echelon highs between staggered depocentres herein identified as transfer zones sensu Faulds and Varga 1998 , McClay et al. 2004 and McClay et al. 2005 . For this reason, they influence the curved S shaped geometries of half-graben and graben depocentres in the outer proximal domain of the Santos Basin Fig. 6c , just as primary FS2 faults do in the inner proximal domain. Furthermore, displacement differences amongst primary faults in FS1 and FS2 likely imposed local adjustments in strain, with minor 17 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 Fig. 13. Example of putative 4th-order sequences as interpreted in Antunes et al. 2024 , Minzoni et al. 2021 , Barnett et al., 2021a,b and Oliveira et al. 2021 . These lower order 4th-order sequences appear as internal progradational reflections black dashed lines in seismic data. The colours of faults systems and strati graphic orders follow Fig. 9 and Table 1. The locations of arbitrary sections L-L , and M-M are shown in Fig. 2. 5.2.2. Small-scale faults in FS2 Small-scale, ancillary structures that are oblique to secondary faults also occur in FS2 see zoomed-in inset in Fig. 6-b . In terms of their dimensions, small-scale F2 faults are 1.0 5.8 km tall and 2.0 19 km long Fig. 15c . Their lower and upper tips never propagate beyond the traces of secondary and primary faults, thus revealing their inferior rank in FS2. Small-scale faults also present rhombic geometries in map view and were formed as linkage or transfer faults resulting from the coalescence of larger normal fault segments as documented in other extensional basins by Crider and Pollard 1998 , Dawers and Underh 2000 , Long and Imber 2012 , Morley et al. 2007, 2004 see pink faults in Fig. 6-b . Small-scale faults usually show normal displacements and a planar ge ometry, though some curved profile segments may document local reverse offsets see white ellipses in Fig. 16 . They are most abundant in the central part of the Bu zios field, where they form rhombic geometries that result from the linkage of discrete normal faults see zoomed-in inset in Fig. 6-b . When the degree of overlap and normal displace ment of primary or secondary faults is significant, small-scale faults can break through the relay ramps separating larger fault segments C iftc i and Bozkurt, 2008 Peacock and Sanderson, 1994 Trudgill and Cart wright, 1994 . They typically control accommodation space in the In termediate Rift sequences but can also propagate into older Pre-Rift strata Fig. 9-b . 5.3. Late-rift fault system 3 FS3 Primary faults in Fault System 3 FS3 occur exclusively in the distal domain of the Santos Basin, where the crust is thinned to between 6 km and 8 km see area spanning 400 km and 550 km in Fig. 9 . Because of the reduced span of our 3D seismic data, it was only possible to measure FS3 on the regional ION-GXT profiles, where they reach a height of 4.5 7.0 km and a length of 12 22 km Fig. 17a . Crustal blocks in the distal domain, delimited by FS3, are narrower and shorter along-strike than those in the outer proximal domain see Fig. 7 . Also, primary faults in FS3 systematically dip oceanwards and delineate rotated blocks that are rooted in the lower crust Figs. 7 and 9 . While cross-cutting relationships amongst FS3 and older structures may exist, they have not been observed in seismic data. However, the syn chronous filling of the accommodation space created by the relative rotation between the crustal blocks in the distal domain as shown in Fig. 4b and the orange rectangle in Fig. 9a provides a reliable temporal marker for our interpretation, thus indicating that FS3 is younger than FS1 and FS2. 5.3.1. Secondary faults in FS3 Secondary faults in FS3 have a similar configuration to primary faults, but their lower tips terminate in the upper crust Fig. 6d and 9 . They form a secondary family to primary faults in FS3 and never exceed 18 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 Fig. 14. Statistical data for Fault System 1 FS1 . a Log-log plot of fault height vs. length for FS1-a emphasizing the relationship recorded between these two fault properties. b Log-Log plot of fault height vs. length for FS1-b. c Com parison between FS1-a and FS1-b in terms of their height and length. Note that FS1-b faults are larger than FS1-a faults. The dashed ellipse in c highlights a break in the trend line beyond which length increases faster than height in FS1b. This break is related to the change from deepening to coalescing lakes in the study area, as suggested by Arau jo et al., 2023 . Trend lines are shown in a and b together with their corresponding equations. their limits of their upper and lower tips. Resultant fault blocks are increasingly rotated towards the ocean they appear extremely rotated and thinned, resembling crustal rafts close to the area where the ocean continent boundary has been defined e.g., from 400 km to 550 km in Fig. 9, see also Fig. 8d . This configuration is similar to that described in the distal parts of the West Iberia-Newfoundland conjugate by Ranero and Pe rez-Gussinye 2010 . Again, based on the regional ION-GXT profiles, secondary faults record a height of 2.7 3.5 km for a length of 10 15 km Fig. 17-b . 5.3.2. Small-scale in FS3 outer proximal domain The outer proximal domain reveals an important sub-set of faults that is synchronous with FS3 structures developed in the distal domain Fig. 6d . This sub-set comprises synthetic and antithetic pairs of normal faults, which can occur hanging within Late Rift strata i.e., they are not necessarily rooted in pre-existing structures Fig. 16 . Small-scale faults in FS3 are 300 m to 2.8 km tall and 700 m to 10 km long. They are relatively small when compared to the other fault systems, even those with relatively minor displacements Figs. 12, 16 and 17 . Small-scale faults in FS3 are sub-parallel to the axial traces of folds which, when breached, give rise to the faults. Cross-cutting relationships in this subset of faults suggest a succession of discrete extensional events with possible local stress-field rotation, like that documented in Morley 2010 . Small-scale FS3 faults in the outer proximal zone have a Y profile that is similar to that formed during extension-related fault propagation Figs. 12 and 16 . Reverse throws may occur when the antithetic branches of these small-scale faults develop an upward convex curved profile, as highlighted by the blue ellipses in Fig. 16. Generally, reverse displacements result from variations in fault geometry that are associ ated with rheological contrasts between layers Ferrill et al., 2005 Hardy and McClay, 1999 Jin and Groshong, 2006 Sharp et al., 2000 . In parallel, antithetic faults in this sub-set may display directions that are oblique to earlier faults, sometimes cross-cutting, linking to or con necting older fault segments. This is particularly observed near the Mero Field, where its NE trend favours such a linkage. 6. Tectono-stratigraphic evolution of the Santos Basin s Outer High In order to position the stratigraphic sequences proposed in a geological time-scale, we follow the framework of Arau jo et al. 2023 in this work. Thus, the isopachous Camboriu Formation Valanginian sensu Moreira et al. 2007 was interpreted to reflect the pre-tectonic setting that heralded the main phases of syn-rift extension in the San tos Basin Figs. 9 11 . Based on our comprehensive seismic and borehole dataset, continental rifting began in the Hauterivian 130 Ma after the Camboriu Formation was deposited. Later, the study area witnessed the formation of isolated half-grabens, which were filled by the first order sequence 1SEQ1. At a larger scale of analysis, the 1st-order unconformity separating 1SEQ1 from 1SEQ2, marks the end of the intraplate rifting phase in the Santos Basin. An important result in this work is that 2nd-order sequences reveal an important tectonic event marked by the angular unconformity that separates 2SEQ1 from 2SEQ2 Fig. 18 . The Early Rift stage records the nucleation of depocentres that are bounded by faults coupled to caption on next column 19 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 basement structures. The geometry of strata filling the depocentres delimited by FS1 faults suggests the formation of isolated lakes, and these were followed by a stage of lake deepening that is materialized by 2SEQ1 Fig. 18 . In the outer proximal domain, the transition between the Early Rift and the lower part of the Intermediate Rift stage - a stage better defined farther south near the Tupi field - is marked by a funda mental change in the geometry of evolving depocentres, with prominent half-grabens containing divergent growth strata Figs. 9 and 10 below the 123 Ma-old Late Barremian Synrift Unconformity LBRSU . This Barremian stratigraphic marker separates sag type basins with iso pachous strata from clear syn-rift depocentres below. At this time, the older half-graben basins filled by 1SEQ1 were aborted and rotated, deformed, and in many cases offset by FS2 faults. These newly formed faults created accommodation space for sediment above the LBRSU, and cross-cut or reactivated FS1 depending on their relative orientations. This allowed for lake expansion and coalescence during 2SEQ2, leading to a more prominent vertical stacking of strata above the LBRSU. Thus, the unconformity separating 2SEQ1 from 2SEQ2, as well as the relative chronology of faulting revealed by FS1-a and FS1-b, are interpreted in this work as the key markers of when the coalescence of these lakes started Fig. 18 . Karner and Driscoll 1999 and Karner 2000 interpret the period ranging from 130 Ma to 126 Ma Hauterivian , equivalent to our 2SEQ1, as representing the first influx of sediments into the Santos Basin. They associated it with the initial phase of distributed deformation that marks the onset of continental rifting. We observe that the half-grabens filled by 2SEQ1 were rotated by their boundary faults, creating accommoda tion space that was subsequently filled by 2SEQ2. Importantly, this same sequence 2SEQ2, Barremian in age, filled half-grabens than are broader than those in which 1SEQ1 is observed and mapped Figs. 10 and 14c . In selected seismic profiles, the FS1-b structures that bound 2SEQ2 cross-cut the older FS1-a Fig. 10 . Their angular relationship tends to wards orthogonality, or even complete coupling when faults become sub-parallel. Rift depocentres were gently folded, formed sag-like synclines, and generated the accommodation space filled by 2SEQ3, because of the relative movement between crustal blocks promoted by resulting from the onset of development of the FS2 fault. The deposition of 2SEQ4 occurred at the end of this process where FS2 faults establish an internal hierarchy and their primary faults reach the base of the ridge. This stage can be correlated with the Lake Expansion stage defined in Arau jo et al. 2023 . According to these authors, distributed fault-related deforma tion lasted until the LBRSU 123 Ma, Barremian and is roughly corre lated with the onset of FS2 s development Fig. 18 . In such a setting, the proximal margin gradually focused strain and developed primary faults in FS2. The LBRSU unconformity thus marks the beginning of activity in FS2, with strata with a post-tectonic geometry sag-type initially filling the palaeo-relief inherited from FS1, but then adopting a more isopachous, continuous geometry towards the upper part of 2SEQ3, i.e. from late Barremian to the mid Aptian 117 Ma . From mid to late Aptian 113 Ma , deposition in 2SEQ4 occurred in sag-type depocentres that are recognized by the presence of low-angle erosional truncations at their base Figs. 9 11 . At this time, the changing thermo-mechanical conditions affecting the upper crust caused its fragmentation within a generalized brittle regime. In contrast, the lower crust was weak enough to allow the migration of the rift axis towards the distal domain, but still too strong to allow the lower crust to massively flow Arau jo et al., 2023 . This setting thinned the profile of the lithosphere, with choke points being subsequently formed at the base of the upper crust together with the coupling of primary FS2 faults on the top of the lower crust e.g., Chenin et al., 2020, 2018 Mohn et al., 2012 Ribes et al., 2020 . Such a setting seems to have allowed for a greater freedom of movement between crustal blocks delimiting discrete depocentres. As a result of this same crustal block movement, 1SEQ1 now rests directly on the lower crust in the inner proximal domain and its internal pattern is complex, predominantly chaotic Fig. 18 . Fig. 15. Statistical data for Fault System 2 FS2 . a Log-Log plot of fault height vs. length for primary faults in FS2. b Log-Log plot of fault height vs. length for secondary faults in FS2. c Log-Log plot of fault height vs. length for small-scale faults in FS2. d Comparison between height and length for all fault types in FS2. Note the scale jump observed for each fault sub-set primary, secondary and small-scale faults. 20 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 Fig. 16. Arbitrary seismic profiles revealing the structural style of fault-propagation folds formed under continuous extensional tectonics. These fault-propagation folds occur in FS3 see green faults and mainly deform 2SEQ5 and 2SEQ6. They occur as synthetic dark green faults and antithetic pairs light green faults stemming from incipient and decoupled faults that offset 2SEQ5 and 2SEQ6. Arrows highlight the presence of reverse offsets on small-scale FS3 antithetical structures blue ellipses . In FS2, normal and reverse faults alternate in space and they are always bounded by faults of a higher rank primary and secondary faults . White ellipses show alternating normal and reverse offsets on small-scale FS2 structures. Small scale faults in FS2 also do not propagate above the top of 2SEQ4. They barely propagate downwards out of 1SEQ3, though some reach the top of 1SEQ2. A vertical exaggeration of 3x is used in the seismic profiles. 1 Primary faults in FS1-b coupled with FS1-a 2 - Primary faults in FS1-b offset and cross-cut FS1-a 3 Primary and secondary faults in FS2 offset FS1 structures. In the outer proximal domain, sag-type depocentres filled by 2SEQ3 are smaller than in 2SEQ4 and more closely associated with the move ment of primary faults in FS2, i.e., those delineating crustal blocks. Towards the distal margin, 2SEQ4 fills syn-tectonic depocentres with prominent stratal growth against FS3 faults, and these same syn-tectonic strata are lateral equivalents of sag-type units in the proximal domain see orange rectangle in Fig. 9-b . This is an important observation as it means that the deposition of 2SEQ4 continued beyond the end of tec tonic activity in FS2, filling depocentres bounded by FS3. In a free interpretation, it is possible that FS2 faults developed into FS3 structures in the distal domain from the moment the crust was sufficiently thinned to control the thermo-mechanical regime of the basin, thus promoting oceanwards migration of the rift axis. However, such an interpretation is hard to corroborate by the overlapping of FS2 and FS3 faults position in distal parts of the Santos Basin. In other words, it is likely that FS3 overprinted, and even obliterated, the record of any FS2 faults in the distal domain. When the thermo-mechanical regime promoted the for mation of FS3, and its related stratigraphic sequences 2SEQ5 and 2SEQ6, the relatively older FS2 stopped controlling crustal extension. Instead, FS3 took the leading role in the distal domain. In the final Late Rift stage, the deposition of 2SEQ5 and 2SEQ6 in the latest Aptian 113 Ma and early Albian 110 Ma correlates with the Basin Lake stage of Arau jo et al. 2023 , in which shallow-water car bonates 2SEQ5 were deposited on the Outer High of the Santos Basin 21 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 Fig. 17. Statistical data for Fault System 3 FS3 . a Log-Log plot of fault height vs. length for primary faults in FS3. All primary faults in FS3 were interpreted along the regional ION-GXT lines due to the lack of 3D seismic coverage in the distal domain of the Santos Basin. b Log-Log plot of fault height vs. length for secondary faults in FS3. c Log-Log plot of fault height vs. length for small-scale FS3 faults in the outer proximal domain. d Comparison of all faults interpreted as FS3 structures. Note the scale jump observed for primary, secondary and small-scale faults. while evaporite deposition occurred in sag-type basins of the proximal domain 2SEQ6 Fig. 18 . At this same time, evaporites Arri Forma tion were deposited in depocentres evolving in the distal domain. Hence, FS3 continued to accommodate the bulk of fault-related subsi dence in the Late Rift stage while FS2 faults became inactive, with some minor reactivation occurring later near the structures delimiting the largest crustal blocks. In such a context, late fault reactivation was accompanied by extensional fault-propagation folding, particularly in small-scale FS3 structures Figs. 12, 16 and 17 . Finally, the physiog raphy at the end of the rifting process becomes inclined towards the ocean see phase 5 in Fig. 18 as the result of thermal subsidence, combined with the loading resulting from the deposition of drift-stage sequences in the Santos basin. 7. Discussion 7.1. Significance of 1st-order sequences and their boundaries across distinct margin domains Coming from the inner proximal to the distal domains of the Santos Basin, we prove that there is no single stratigraphic package, or even a single sequence boundary, with a uniform or unaltered character, since many syn-rift sequences will cease to exist towards the loci of conti nental breakup Alves et al., 2020 and Alves and Abreu Cunha, 2018 Fig. 19 . Our seismic interpretation highlights the presence of signifi cant angular truncations between 1SEQ1 and 1SEQ2 see Figs. 10 and 11 and shallow-angle truncations between 1SEQ2 and 1SEQ3, config uring a post-tectonic pattern in the outer proximal domain Fig. 11, between wells 17 and 27 . Synchronously, the shallow-angle angular truncations between 1SEQ2 and 1SEQ3 change laterally into high-angle angular truncations in the distal domain, thus configuring a syn-tectonic pattern in the distal domain see orange rectangle in Fig. 9 . By associ ating these truncation and stratigraphic onlap relationships between the 1st-order sequences, as well as the final margin architecture with its established domains, we deduce a direct influence of margin-scale pro cesses in the development and origin of the truncations separating 1st-order sequences Fig. 19a . Thus, erosional truncations between the 1st-order sequences were interpreted as a consequence of polyphase deformation and tilting of the margin in the direction of rift axis migration during and after continental breakup Fig. 18 . This explains the regional profile of 1st-order sequences inclined towards the oceans interpreted in this study, while they tend to amalgamate towards the continent see the grey rectangle in Fig. 9 . This aspect guided our interpretation to highlight a direct association between the provision of accommodation space for sediments in the 1st primary stratigraphic order and the thermomechanical conditions supported by the litho sphere during the whole of the continental rifting process. We favour the hypothesis that changes in the thermo-mechanical regime of the lithosphere were, in the Santos Basin, materialized by the development of distinct fault systems Figs. 9 and 19 . Thus, FS1-a and FS1-b document a stage of intraplate rifting under which mechan ical conditions were similar to those proposed by the classical models explaining lithospheric extension in an intracontinental regime Chenin et al., 2022 . This explains the pattern we observe in seismic data during the Lower Rift stage when prominent, but small, half-grabens were bounded by faults in FS1 that are and were at the time coupled to basement structures. These half-graben basins were filled by 2SEQ1 and caption on next column 22 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 Fig. 18. Panel summarizing main syn-rift tectono-stratigraphic events on the Outer High of the Santos Basin, with a focus on its proximal domain. Second order sequences were used as markers for fault movement and associated crustal-block rotation. A Three-dimensional view of main depocentres and infilling strata. Emphasis is given to the fact that changes in the scale of observation are needed to understand the relationships established between 1st-, 2nd- and 3rd-order se quences, and their bounding fault systems, during syn-rift extension. B Relationship amongst the nucleation, development and death of fault systems and the timing s of basin infill by 2nd-order sequences. b.1 Relative sequence of fault systems FS1 to FS3 and its effect on the geological evolution of the study area. b.2 Provides a summary, or comparison before and after , between each step in b.1. The transparent grey lines indicate the initial position of strata and faults, while the coloured transparencies indicate their final position for each stage. The polyphase signature of the margin s tectonic evolution is reflected, in our diagram, by the development of particular styles of erosional truncation and reflection terminations between stratigraphic sequences, a character stressing how important where changes in the depositional gradient and the availability of space accommodation at each stage. 2SEQ2 Fig. 9 . Faults in FS2 define the internal structure of the inner and outer proximal domains of the Santos Basin. Although their upper tips are nearly planar and sub-vertical, primary F2 faults appear slightly curved at their lower tips - they are coupled with discontinuities and structures in the upper crust Figs. 9 and 10 . This suggests that the generation of FS2 occurred in response to crustal thinning, within a setting dominated by changing thermo-mechanical conditions due to an increase in regional heat flow, which was sufficient to weaken the lower crust and allow it to flow Arau jo et al., 2023 . In this Intermediate Rift stage, a necking zone was formed in the outer proximal domain, where a marked change in structural style generated large detachment faults wherever viscoplastic stretching conditions were dominant Chenin et al., 2018 Fletcher and Hallet, 1983 . Finally, FS3 was mostly developed in the distal domain during the hyperextension and continental breakup stages. Here, the observed reduction in crustal block size, and conse quent increase in their spatial density, are consistent with the onset of a frictional thinning regime of the Coulomb Wedge type for an entirely brittle continental crust Chenin et al., 2022 Nirrengarten et al., 2016 . In fact, a clear Mantle Exhumation stage is not recorded in the Santos Basin Arau jo et al., 2023 Evain et al., 2015 . The high quality 2D and 3D seismic data and borehole data used in this work confirm that changes in the thermo-mechanical conditions of the Santos Basin led to the formation, and later consolidation, of distinct structural domains. Importantly, these same thermo-mechanical and structural changes are recorded as 1st-order stratigraphic sequences and their bounding stratigraphic surfaces, as expressed by the Wheeler dia gram in Fig. 19a. At a regional scale, the Wheeler diagram reveals synchronous syn-tectonic and post-tectonic strata in 1SEQ2 and 1SEQ3, as demonstrated by points P1 to P7 in Fig. 19a. This synchronicity be comes even clearer when considering the hierarchy and stacking pat terns of 2nd-order sequences, and agrees with early studies of rifted margins that defend an oceanward migration of the rift axis during continental-margin development e.g. Chenin et al., 2022 Manatschal and Bernoulli, 1999 Pe rez-Gussinye et al., 2020 , particularly, when evoking the phases that immediately preceded full continental breakup Alves et al., 2023 Alves and Abreu Cunha, 2018 . Over the outer proximal domain, rift-axis oceanward migration accompanied a gradual decrease in tectonic activity in FS2, as this fault system offsets strata down to the base of the salt unit in 2SEQ6, but seldom beyond this stratigraphic marker. Conversely, a synchronous coexistence between syn- and post-tectonic patterns cannot be observed for small-scale faults formed on the Outer High. Another important aspect is the time span of 1st-order sequences in the Santos Basin. In the context of SE Brazil as a continental margin akin to many other rifted margins, the time span of 1st-order sequences 23 P.R.O. Andrade et al. 24 Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 Fig. 19. Wheeler diagrams for the Outer High of the Santos Basin at the margin regional scale and crustal-block semi-regional scale. a Regional Wheeler diagram progressive oceanward migration of the rift axis. Syn-tectonic and post-tectonic strata are observed at a local scale, as illustrated by positions P1 to P5 in the diagram. At the same time, P4, P5, P6 and P7 show a syn-tectonic pattern towards the distal part, at the regional scale, stressing the diachronism of syn-rift sequences tops towards the locus of continental break. b Wheeler diagram at the crustal-block scale for syn-tectonic and post-tectonic strata in the outer proximal domain. The oceanward migration of the rift axis is hardly observed at the local scale, from P8 to P11. The legend for these diagrams is shown in Fig. 18. P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 decreases as tectonic activity ensues and the margin evolves towards its continental-breakup stage. In practice, this means that 1SEQ1 Lower Rift stage was deposited in a time span of 12 Ma, 1SEQ2 Intermediate Rift stage lasted for 10 Ma, and 1SEQ3 Late Rift stage lasted for 3 Ma while continental breakup was developing oceanwards from the Outer High of the Santos Basin. The time span of 1SEQ3 includes the deposi tion of a thick salt unit in 2SEQ6 Fig. 19 . In contrast, the 1st-order drift sequence that overlies the Santos Basin rift basins records a time span of c. 110 Ma based on Moreira et al. 2007 . grouping, sets of faults when only using local geophysical or borehole data, as the data in this paper clearly shows. One needs to seek corre lations on a regional scale to discriminate between fault systems. Our comprehensive data set shows there is no dimensional continuum in the fault systems interpreted in the Santos Basin. The best-fit power laws for each system show similar slopes, but do not form a single straight line in the fault s height length log-log plots see Fig. 20 . Instead, they occupy almost parallel positions to each other, revealing primary, secondary and small-scale fault clusters in Fig. 15 e Fig. 17. Based on such fault statistical data, we argue that these data clusters reveal a hierarchical deformation process in the Santos Basin. This is because it makes sense to think that faults are the product of the seismic-tectonic activity that developed the rifted margin. In support of this interpretation, many publications have discussed how is hierarchical stress related to fault patterns . They have confirmed that faulting patterns, earthquake hypocentres and other seismological phenomena, are neither geomet rically simple nor purely fractal at all scales. Rather they are somewhat band-limited Kato and Lei, 2001 Kusunose et al., 1991 Lei et al., 1993 or hierarchical Cheremnykh et al., 2020 Ouillon et al., 1996 Seminsky and Cheremnykh, 2011 . Different power laws hold separately in all or some of these bands Lei et al., 1993 Lei and Kusunose, 1999 . 7.2. Fault-system classification and relationship with syn-rift stratigraphic sequences This work made possible to associate the evolution of syn-rift fault systems, and their related stratigraphic sequences, along the full width of a rifted continental margin Figs. 18 and 19 . In fact, the statistical data in Figs. 14, Fig. 15, Fig. 17, and mainly in Fig. 20, show primary and secondary faults belonging to different phases, i.e. belonging to defor mation events separated in time. However, they share similar fields and very similar dimensions see dashed ellipses in Fig. 20 . This character explains the difficulty in accurately separating, or Fig. 20. Comparison of fault height vs. length data for primary, secondary and small-scale faults in all interpreted fault systems. Note that without a prior knowledge of faults relative chronology, structures with distinct ages and dimensions may share the same dimensional field see dashed ellipse . 25 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 Hence, different power laws may be valid in all or some of these band ranges Lei et al., 1993 Lei and Kusunose, 1999 Rotevatn et al., 2019 , a concept that corroborates what is observed in the graphs in Figs. 14, 15, 17 and 20. At first, one is led to think that primary faults in FS1, FS2 and FS3 are the largest. This holds true within a set of synchronous faults but, when considering fault systems and discrete faults of different ages, such a postulate becomes hard to validate, particularly within a continental rifting setting where the thickness of the crust changes in time and space. Thus, the dimensions of primary faults can and do vary in the Santos Basin depending on the domain in which they occur, i.e. their di mensions vary depending on the stage of development of the rifting continental margin on which they originate. As a result, primary faults in the inner and outer proximal domains tend to be larger than faults formed exclusively in the distal domain the crustal thickness is greater in the proximal domain of the Santos Basin when compared to its distal domain Fig. 20 . This is a character also reflected in the size of rotated crustal blocks, which are larger in the internal proximal domain and smaller in the outer proximal domain of the margin Figs. 7 and 9b . It is thus important to highlight that comparing syn-rift fault systems only makes sense when dealing with synchronous faults. It makes no sense to compare the dimensions and evolutions of faults that are diachronous and responded to distinct stress conditions and tectonic events see Figs. 14, 15, 17 and 20 . Likewise, analysing fault dimensions alone does not suffice as method for classifying faults. For instance, primary faults in FS1, secondary faults in FS2 and FS3, as well as the smaller, ancillary faults in FS2 have all similar dimensions, as illustrated in Fig. 20. Our approach allows us to suggest that a faults were first generated with similar sizes during the Early Rift stage, and b they were differ entiated into different fault systems throughout the margin development process. Therefore, relatively small faults coalesced as continental rift ing ensued. Primary faults in FS1, FS2 and FS3 developed where crustal deformation was focused to favour specific locations for the later rupture of the upper crust. In other words, faults only became primary after they ruptured the entire crust. Importantly, factors such as rheo logical contrasts in the crust, the existence of a pre-existent structural fabric, time and spatial changes in the thermo-mechanical conditions of the margin, controlled which faults evolved as primary structures, making it difficult to accurately predict in forward models - which fault in larger set will rupture the crust to become a primary structure. This is a caveat that requires in-depth studies beyond the original purpose of this work. Our data suggest that the faults nucleated along basement sutures, or significant tectonic contacts between basement terrains, were more successful in delineating crustal blocks in the later stages of con tinental rifting. Yet, changes in the dynamics and regional stress con ditions of continental rifting could still have led to the nucleation and development of new faults that did not necessarily originate from the coalescence of pre-existing faults Figs. 9 and 12. Finally, the relationship between the hierarchies of stratigraphic sequences and corresponding fault systems depends on the geological context of continental rifting, e.g. on the evolutionary history of the future continental margin. As demonstrated for the Santos Basin, the dimensions and areal extent of 1st -order sequences can be much larger than the dimensions of discrete half-graben depocentres, i.e. 1st-order sequences can fill several depocentres delimited by primary fault sys tems. This is why 1st-order stratigraphic sequences and their bounding surfaces are ideal for mapping and laterally correlate basins at a continental-margin scale see Figs. 6 and 9 . As for correlations across each margin domain, 2nd-order sequences and their bounding surfaces are more efficient, allowing for a better discretization of stratigraphic stacking relationships, and also the deformation processes affecting each margin domain see Figs. 9 and 11 . Lastly, 3rd- and 4th-order sequences were recorded only in specific parts of the margin, near small-scale ancillary faults see Figs. 12 and 16 . In parts of the study area, both 3rd-order sequences and associated faults were resolved well enough in seismic data to allow their identification. In less favourable or more complex contexts, such an interpretation can be hard to attain. 7.3. Stratigraphic responses to tectonic stimuli The outer proximal domain of the Santos Basin records a drastic change in structural style, and also in the way accommodation space became available for sediment across the study area, compared to the inner proximal margin. Subsidence was focused on the faults that define crustal blocks of the outer proximal domain. In general terms, this deformation style aligns with the numerical models of lithospheric extension on rifted continental margins Arau jo et al., 2023 Chenin et al., 2022 Manatschal et al., 2022 . However, primary detachment faults in FS2 die out at the top of the lower crust, not in the mantle, despite clearly breaking through the upper crust. The distal domain also does not assume the classic architecture of a hyperextended margin, despite presenting a significant degree of crustal thinning and evident crustal block movement, rotation and segmentation Fig. 20 . Part of the study area is located over a regional transfer zone RJTZ, Fig. 6 , and a typical hyperextension profile was not achieved as the faults do fully offset the crust. At the onset of movement in FS2, the upper crust recorded flexural rebound near primary faults in the outer proximal domain, as inter preted from the concentration of fault throws at the edges of the crustal blocks, followed by the gentle arching of the footwalls where the onlapping of 1SEQ3 over 1SEQ2 or 2SEQ5 over 2SEQ4, in the 2ndorder is observed see Figs. 8, 10, 12 and 16 . Consequently, surface topography was rejuvenated and depositional gradients changed near and at the scale of the imaged crustal blocks. Such phenomena, occurring in association with fault reactivation, justifies evoking late movement of crustal blocks in the outer proximal domain, which continued until FS3 was generated and 1SEQ3 was deposited Fig. 9 . Evidence for these relative tectonic movements is gathered by the lowangle truncations separating 2SEQ3 and 2SEQ4, which are synchro nous with the propagation of FS2 and subsequent formation of the outer proximal domain. The development of FS2 is obvious in seismic data due to the clear fault displacements and cross-cutting relationships FS2 reveals with FS1, 2SEQ1 and 2SEQ2 see numbers 1, 2 and 3 in Fig. 10 . In fact, FS2 offsets the crust and fragments the Outer High into discrete crustal blocks, with the resulting movement of primary and secondary faults in this system controlling depositional gradients Figs. 9 and 11 . Secondary faults in FS2 controlled accommodation space and depositional gradients in the study area, but their influence is smaller than that of primary faults in this same system Figs. 18 and 19 . Nevertheless, they were important enough to promote relative movement amongst adjacent structural highs, thereby creating the local accommodation space in which 2SEQ3 and 2SEQ4 were preserved Fig. 9a and 19 . The stratigraphic record of the Outer High, which is mainly related to the onset and later development of FS2, can therefore be understood as the convolution of three processes operating at different scales. The first and most signifi cant of processes is that acting on the regional, geodynamic scale, as it controlled the profile of crustal thinning and the regional depositional gradient of the Santos Basin. This scale is represented, stratigraphically, by 1st-order sequences in each of the margin domains, whose develop ment followed the direction of rift-axis migration. The second of these processes, the tilting of the crustal blocks at an intermediate scale, responded to the development and movement of specific syn-rift faults. It is represented by the formation of primary and secondary faults in FS2, which only penetrated through the upper crust and allowed for the relative movement of deforming crustal blocks. Accommodation space between these crustal blocks was filled by 2nd-order sequences. The third process, reflecting the movement of local structural highs on top or between crustal blocks, was controlled by small-scale faults in FS2, and generated accommodation at the local scale filled by 3rd-order se quences Fig. 9, Figs. 12 and 18 . 26 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 Figs. 18 and 19 . Not being the primary focus of this study, the distal domain never theless comprises the tectono-stratigraphic record of the Santos Basin during its final evolutionary stages continental breakup . In this regard, the nucleation of primary and secondary faults in FS3 delaminated the already highly thinned upper crust by forming a set of detachment faults Epin and Manatschal, 2018 Lymer et al., 2019 Fig. 9-b . This process destabilized the outer proximal domain mechanically, forcing it to adjust via the smaller-scale, ancillary faults in FS3 Fig. 9 . Additionally, flexural rebound followed by thermal-driven subsidence resulted in the onlapping of 1SEQ3 over 1SEQ2 in the outer proximal domain Figs. 9, 18 and 19 . Coherent and robust correlations between producing fields and structural compartments in the Santos Basin depends on analyses that span different scales of observation. As a corollary of our work, we suggest in Fig. 21 a modified stratigraphic chart for the Santos Basin to better represent the process of oceanward migration of the rift axis and related depocentres. Even if the ages of tectonic event sequences are updated in future work, the truncation relationships between sequences and fault systems will be maintained. By the end of the development of primary faults in FS2, the Outer High of the Santos Basin became limited by a metamorphic core complex separating the outer proximal from the inner proximal domains Figs. 7 and 8c . Such an event suggests that, near this core complex, 2SEQ2 began its deposition under an extensional regime dominated by halfgraben depocentres but, with the progressive development of the metamorphic core complex, some depocentres were somehow involved in subsequent deformation episodes affecting the Santos Basin. Thus, 2SEQ2 points out to a late emplacement of the metamorphic core complex, as this sequence is deformed rotated and the upper crust below was faulted and broken, putting 2SEQ2 in direct contact with the lower crust. This is a possible interpretation for the origin of the meta morphic core complex with consequence for the evolution of adjacent depocentres. In this case, the depocentres delimited by FS1-a and FS1-b faults were aborted and became defined by FS2 structures. Low-angle truncations were formed between 2SEQ4 2SEQ5 and 2SEQ5 2SEQ6 at a later stage, when deformation was focused on the faults that limit main crustal blocks Figs. 9 and 11 . A relative late movement of crustal blocks explains the generation of the accommo dation space needed for the stacking of the Itapema Formation, an equivalent unit to 2SEQ3 Fig. 5 . According to Antunes et al. 2024 , the Itapema Formation was deposited in environments that became progressively shallower into the Barra Velha Formation 2SEQ4 into 2SEQ5 . However, siliciclastic mudstones mark the top of the Itapema Formation immediately below the Pre-Alagoas Unconformity PAU, around 117 Ma , indicating a significant deepening of the lake that drowned the coquina section Antunes et al., 2024 . This can be explained by evoking late crustal-block movement rebound close to the limits of crustal blocks and accompanying tectonic subsidence. Based on our data, we interpret that most of the accommodation space for 2SEQ5 and 2SEQ6 resulted from the combination of thermal subsidence and tectonic stimuli acting on primary faults, some of these distant from the structural highs over which oil fields are located Figs. 11 and 12 . Thus, not all the stratigraphic record preserved in the Outer High s oil fields, particularly between 2SEQ5 and 2SEQ6, results from local tectonic stimuli acting on faults immediately below or around them. Rather, we stress the significance of distant tectonic stimuli focused on the boundaries of main crustal blocks, with these stimuli having been significant in the Intermediate Rift and Late Rift stages 8. Conclusions A detailed integration of geodynamic, tectonic, structural geology, and sequence stratigraphic data was attained to address the spatiotem poral evolution of syn-rift faults, and their related stratigraphic units, on the Outer High of the Santos Basin. This approach involved the use of a suite of high-resolution 2D and 3D seismic surveys, tied to stratigraphic data from 155 boreholes, and resulted in the identification of three 3 main fault systems near some of the most prolific fields in SE Brazil. These fault systems were characterized in terms of their dimensions, geometries, structural styles, and trends. The results of this work can be summarized as follows a The three 3 fault systems identified during the rifting and crustal thinning process controlled the evolution of inner proximal, outer proximal, and distal domains in the Santos Basin. b The fault systems identified in seismic data are of different ages, controlled deposition in extensional basins evolving at different Fig. 21. Revised stratigraphic chart for the Santos Basin taking into account the progressive oceanward migration of the rift axis with time and the temporal evolution of related depocentres. The outer contour of the proposed chart represents a simplification of the Wheeler s diagram shown in Fig. 19. Lithological units are simplified from Antunes et al. 2024 The relative ages of stratigraphic units is based on the ICS International Chronostratigraphic of Cohen et al. 2013 . Proposed rifting stages 1 Late Rift, 2 Intermediate Rift, 3 Early Rift. Note the relative timing of distinct fault systems in the right-hand column. 27 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 times, and can thus be hierarchized with the aim of understanding their geodynamic significance. c Fault system 1 FS1 controlled deposition in the oldest syn-rift sequence and delimits the very first half-graben basins developed during the Early Rift stage. d Fault System 2 FS2 was formed during the Intermediate Rift stage and controlled accommodation space for strata in 1st- and 2nd-order sequences. It comprises three distinct sub-systems, i.e. primary, secondary and small-scale faults. The adoption of nomenclature to characterize the hierarchy of fault systems is flexible, and classifi cations such as 1st-, 2nd- and 3rd-order can be used. e Fault System 3 FS3 responded to the migration of the rift axis to wards the distal domain of the Santos Basin, controlling subsidence and sediment accommodation space in a Late Rift stage. However, it also denotes reactivation of FS2 faults along the edges of the crustal blocks, as well as the nucleation and development of faultpropagation folds, on a local scale, in the entire proximal domain of the basin. f Correlations between fault systems and their adjacent syn-rift strata show that 1st-order stratigraphic sequences relate to changes in the thermo-mechanical conditions of the Santos Basin. Therefore, sequence 1SEQ1 relates to the initial stages of rifting within an intraplate setting, 1SEQ2 relates to the necking stage with formation of the outer proximal domain, 1SEQ3 accompanied the development of the distal domain in the so-called hyperextension and continental breakup stages. Even though the ages of the sequences may be revised in the future, the vertical stacking relationships and spacetime hierarchy of fault systems and sequences tend to maintain their relative chronology. g Understanding fault dimensions alone is not sufficient a method for classifying faults. In this work, primary faults in FS1, secondary faults in FS2 and FS3, as well as the smaller, ancillary faults in FS2 have all similar dimensions. It is true that deformation in FS2 and FS3 would have followed a hierarchy part of the deformation not fully accommodated by primary faults was dissipated by secondary faults, and later by small-scale faults. However, this is not the case when one compares FS1 to FS2, or FS2 to FS3. Funding This study was financed by Petrobras as part of its Human Resources development program in conjunction with the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro UFRJ , together with the Postgraduate Program in Geology PPGl . Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Acknowledgements This study was financed by Petrobras as part of its Human Resources development program in conjunction with the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro UFRJ , together with the Postgraduate Program in Geology PPGl . R.S Schmitt acknowledges CNPq research grant no. 312663 2022-6 and FAPERJ grant no. E-26 200.995 2021. This PhD thesis is part of the project Geodynamics of the continental lithosphere of GONDWANA SW - the basement of the South Atlantic rift system IGEO n 22661 , a cooperation between PETROBRAS CENPES and UFRJ. We thank the A. Peace, the editor handling this manuscript, plus N. Mattos, M. Khalifa and an anonymous reviewer for their constructive comments. They much improved the first draft submitted to JMPG. Data availability Data will be made available on request. References Adriano, M.S., Figueiredo, J.P., Coelho, P.H.G.R., Borghi, L., 2022. Tectonic and stratigraphic evolution of the Santos Basin rift phase new insights from seismic interpretation on Tupi oil field area. J South Am Earth Sci 116, 103842. https doi. org 10.1016 j.jsames.2022.103842. Alvarenga, R.D.S., Kuchle, J., Iacopini, D., Goldberg, K., Scherer, C.M.D.S., Pantopoulos, G., Ene, P.L., 2021. Tectonic and stratigraphic evolution based on seismic sequence stratigraphy central rift section of the Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Geosciences 11, 338. https doi.org 10.3390 geosciences11080338. Alves, T.M., Abreu Cunha, T., 2018. A phase of transient subsidence, sediment bypass and deposition of regressive transgressive cycles during the breakup of Iberia and Newfoundland. Earth Planet Sci. Lett. 484, 168 183. https doi.org 10.1016 j. epsl.2017.11.054. Alves, T.M., Fetter, M., Busby, C., Cunha, T.A., Mattos, N.H., 2023. Stratigraphic record of continental breakup, offshore NW Australia discussion. Basin Res. 35, 470 482. https doi.org 10.1111 bre.12728. Alves, T.M., Fetter, M., Busby, C., Gontijo, R., Cunha, T.A., Mattos, N.H., 2020. A tectono-stratigraphic review of continental breakup on intraplate continental margins and its impact on resultant hydrocarbon systems. Mar Pet Geol 117, 104341. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2020.104341. Alves, T.M., Fetter, M., Lima, C., Cartwright, J.A., Cosgrove, J., Ganga , A., Queiroz, C.L., Strugale, M., 2017. An incomplete correlation between pre-salt topography, top reservoir erosion, and salt deformation in deep-water Santos Basin SE Brazil . Mar Pet Geol 79, 300 320. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2016.10.015. Antunes, R. de C., Guerrero, J.C., Jahnert, R.J., 2024. Coquina depositional model, Buzios field, Brazil. Mar Pet Geol 160, 106607. https doi.org 10.1016 j. marpetgeo.2023.106607. Arau jo, M.N., Pe rez-Gussinye , M., Muldashev, I., 2023. Oceanward Rift Migration during Formation of Santos Benguela Ultra-wide Rifted Margins, vol. 524. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 65 91. https doi.org 10.1144 SP5242021-123. Barnett, Andrew J., Fu, L., Rapasi, T., Scotellaro, C., Guha, J., Cabolova, A., Domingues, A.L., 2021a. Seismic Characterization and Origin of Clinoforms in Lacustrine Depositional Environments a Case Study from the Cretaceous of the South Atlantic, vol. 509. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 127 145. https doi.org 10.1144 SP509-2019-148. Barnett, A.J., Obermaier, M., Amthor, J., Sharafodin, M., Bolton, M., Clarke, D., Camara, R., 2021b. Chapter 6 Origin and Significance of Thick Carbonate Grainstone Packages in Nonmarine Successions A Case Study from the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazil, in Memoir 124 the Supergiant Lower Cretaceous Pre-salt Petroleum Systems of the Santos Basin. AAPG, Brazil, pp. 155 174. https doi.org 10.1306 13722318MSB.6.1853. Birrell, S., Courtier, J., 1999. Structural analysis of 3D seismic data, using the correlation attribute a case study Carboniferous of the Southern North Sea UK . Geological As a corollary, we propose a revised stratigraphic framework for the Santos Basin. The aim is to represent, with this new framework, the diachronism recorded in seismic and borehole data amongst strati graphic sequences of distinct hierarchical orders. We propose that tec tonostratigraphic studies of rifted continental margins should always be completed by integrating the responses of structural events and depo sitional architecture in time and space. Analyses too focused on just one of these components, or lacking a complete understanding of the tem poral sequence and spatial distribution of fault systems and related synrift stratigraphic sequences, can lead to interpretations that are incon sistent with the true past and present evolutionary history of rifted margins. CRediT authorship contribution statement Peryclys Raynyere de Oliveira Andrade Writing review editing, Writing original draft, Visualization, Validation, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Tiago M. Alves Writing review edit ing, Validation, Supervision, Methodology, Conceptualization. Ma rio Neto Cavalcanti de Arau jo Writing review editing, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Resources, Conceptualization. Renata da Silva Schmitt Validation, Supervision, Project administration, Data curation, Resources. Daniel Galva o Carnier Fragoso Visualization, Validation, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization, Writing review editing. Anderson Henrique de Melo Visualization, Validation, Re sources, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. 28 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 Society, London, Petroleum Geology Conference Series 5, 789 797. https doi.org 10.1144 0050789. Blaich, O.A., Faleide, J.I., Tsikalas, F., 2011. Crustal breakup and continent-ocean transition at South Atlantic conjugate margins. J. Geophys. Res. 116, B01402. https doi.org 10.1029 2010JB007686. Brackenridge, R.E., Russell, L.J., Hartley, A.J., Watson, D., Houghton, T., 2023. Late permian evaporite facies variation in the Forth Approaches basin, north Sea implications for hydrogen storage. Geoenergy 1. https doi.org 10.1144 geoenergy2023-008. Buckley, J.P., Bosence, D., Elders, C., 2015. Tectonic setting and stratigraphic architecture of an Early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonate platform. Sugar Loaf High, Santos Basin, Brazil. Geological Society, London, Special Publications 418, 175 191. https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.13. Carlotto, M.A., da Silva, R.C.B., Yamato, A.A., Trindade, W.L., Moreira, J.L.P., Fernandes, R.A.R., Ribeiro, O.J.S., Gouveia, W.P., Carminati, J.P., Qicai, D., Junfeng, Z., da Silva-Telles, A.C., 2017. Libra a Newborn giant in the Brazilian presalt province. In Giant Fields of the Decade 2000 2010. The American Association of Petroleum Geologists. https doi.org 10.1306 13572006M1133685. Catuneanu, O., 2022. Principles of Sequence Stratigraphy, 2 EDITION. Elsevier B.V. Newnes . Catuneanu, O., 2019a. Model-independent sequence stratigraphy. Earth Sci. Rev. 188, 312 388. https doi.org 10.1016 j.earscirev.2018.09.017. Catuneanu, O., 2019b. Scale in sequence stratigraphy. Mar Pet Geol 106, 128 159. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2019.04.026. Catuneanu, O., Bhattacharya, J.P., Blum, M.D., Dalrymple, R.W., Eriksson, P.G., Fielding, C.R., Fisher, W.L., Galloway, W.E., Gianolla, P., Gibling, M.R., Giles, K.A., Holbrook, J.M., Jordan, R., Kendall, C.G.StC., Macurda, B., Martinsen, O.J., Miall, A. D., Nummedal, D., Posamentier, H.W., Pratt, B.R., Shanley, K.W., Steel, R.J., Strasser, A., Tucker, M.E., 2010. Thematic Set sequence stratigraphy common ground after three decades of development. First Break 28, 41 54. https doi.org 10.3997 1365-2397.2010002. Catuneanu, O., Galloway, W.E., Kendall, C.G.S.t.C., Miall, A.D., Posamentier, H.W., Strasser, A., Tucker, M.E., 2011. Sequence stratigraphy methodology and nomenclature. Newsl. Stratigr. 44, 173 245. https doi.org 10.1127 0078-0421 2011 0011. Chang, H.K., Kowsmann, R.O., Figueiredo, A.M.F., Bender, A., 1992. Tectonics and stratigraphy of the East Brazil Rift system an overview. Tectonophysics 213, 97 138. https doi.org 10.1016 0040-1951 92 90253-3. Chenin, P., Manatschal, G., Ghienne, J., Chao, P., 2022. The syn-rift tectono-stratigraphic record of rifted margins Part II a new model to break through the proximal distal interpretation frontier. Basin Res. 34, 489 532. https doi.org 10.1111 bre.12628. Chenin, P., Schmalholz, S.M., Manatschal, G., Duretz, T., 2020. Impact of crust mantle mechanical coupling on the topographic and thermal evolutions during the necking phase of magma-poor and sediment-starved rift systems a numerical modeling study. Tectonophysics 786, 228472. https doi.org 10.1016 j.tecto.2020.228472. Chenin, P., Schmalholz, S.M., Manatschal, G., Karner, G.D., 2018. Necking of the lithosphere a reappraisal of basic concepts with thermo-mechanical numerical modeling. J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 123, 5279 5299. https doi.org 10.1029 2017JB014155. Cheremnykh, A.V., Burzunova, YuP., Dekabryov, I.K., 2020. Hierarchic features of stress field in the Baikal region case study of the Buguldeika fault Junction. J. Geodyn. 141 142, 101797. https doi.org 10.1016 j.jog.2020.101797. C iftc i, N.B., Bozkurt, E., 2008. Folding of the Gediz graben fill, SW Turkey extensional and or contractional origin Geodin. Acta 21, 145 167. https doi.org 10.3166 ga.21.145-167. Cohen, K.M., Finney, S.C., Gibbard, P.L., Fan, J.-X., 2013. The ICS international chronostratigraphic chart. Episodes 36, 199 204. https doi.org 10.18814 epiiugs 2013 v36i3 002. CPRM, 2004. Servic o geolo gico do Brasil - CPRM. GeoSGB litoestratigrafia 1 1.000.000. Brasi lia Arquivos vetoriais SIG WWW Document . Servic o Geolo gico Do Brasil. https geoportal.sgb.gov.br geosgb . Crider, J.G., Pollard, D.D., 1998. Fault linkage three-dimensional mechanical interaction between echelon normal faults. J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 103, 24373 24391. https doi.org 10.1029 98JB01353. Dawers, N.H., Underh, J.R., 2000. The role of fault interaction and linkage in controlling synrift stratigraphic sequences late Jurassic, Statfjord east area, northern north Sea1. Am Assoc Pet Geol Bull 84, 45 64. https doi.org 10.1306 C9EBCD5B-173511D7-8645000102C1865D. Dehler, N.M., Magnavita, L.P., Gomes, L.C., Rigoti, C.A., de Oliveira, J.A.B., Sant Anna, M.V., da Costa, F.G.D., 2016. The Helmut geophysical anomaly a regional left-lateral transtensional shear zone system connecting Santos and Campos basins, southeastern Brazil. Mar Pet Geol 72, 412 422. https doi.org 10.1016 j. marpetgeo.2016.01.012. Delvaux, D., Moeys, R., Stapel, G., Petit, C., Levi, K., Miroshnichenko, A., Ruzhich, V., San kov, V., 1997. Paleostress reconstructions and geodynamics of the Baikal region, Central Asia, Part 2. Cenozoic rifting. Tectonophysics 282, 1 38. https doi.org 10.1016 S0040-1951 97 00210-2. Epin, M.-Eva, Manatschal, G., 2018. Three-dimensional architecture, structural evolution, and role of inheritance controlling detachment faulting at a hyperextended distal margin the example of the err detachment system SE Switzerland . Tectonics 37, 4494 4514. https doi.org 10.1029 2018TC005125. Evain, M., Afilhado, A., Rigoti, C., Loureiro, A., Alves, D., Klingelhoefer, F., Schnurle, P., Feld, A., Fauck, R., Soares, J., de Lima, M.V., Corela, C., Matias, L., Benabdellouahed, M., Baltzer, A., Rabineau, M., Viana, A., Moulin, M., Aslanian, D., 2015. Deep structure of the Santos Basin-Sa o Paulo Plateau system, SE Brazil. J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 120, 5401 5431. https doi.org 10.1002 2014JB011561. Faulds, J.E., Varga, R.J., 1998. The role of accommodation zones and transfer zones in the regional segmentation of extended terranes. Special Paper of the Geological Society of America 323, 1 45. https doi.org 10.1130 0-8137-2323-X.1. Ferreira, L.C., Stanton, N., Gordon, A.C., Schmitt, R., 2023. The magmatic rifting of Santos Basin aeromagnetic mapping of Dykes, terranes and marginal structures and the Interplay between tectonism and volcanism. Tectonics 42. https doi.org 10.1029 2022TC007560. Ferrill, D.A., Morris, A.P., Sims, D.W., Waiting, D.J., Hasegawa, S., 2005. Development of synthetic layer dip adjacent to normal faults. AAPG Memoir 125 138. https doi. org 10.1306 1033720M853133. Fisher, Q., Kaminskaite, I., del Pino Sanchez, A., 2023. Shale barrier performance in petroleum systems implications for CO 2 storage and nuclear waste disposal. Geoenergy 1. https doi.org 10.1144 geoenergy2023-006. Fletcher, R.C., Hallet, B., 1983. Unstable extension of the lithosphere a mechanical model for basin-and-range structure. J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 88, 7457 7466. https doi.org 10.1029 JB088iB09p07457. Fournier, M., Petit, C., 2007. Oblique rifting at oceanic ridges relationship between spreading and stretching directions from earthquake focal mechanisms. J. Struct. Geol. 29, 201 208. https doi.org 10.1016 j.jsg.2006.07.017. Fragoso, D.G.C., Gabaglia, G.P.R., Magalha es, A.J.C., Scherer, C.M., 2021. Cyclicity and hierarchy in sequence stratigraphy an integrated approach. Brazilian Journal of Geology 51. https doi.org 10.1590 2317-4889202120200106. Fragoso, D.G.C., Kuchenbecker, M., Magalha es, A.J.C., Scherer, C.M.D.S., Gabaglia, G.P. R., Strasser, A., 2022. Cyclicity in Earth sciences, quo vadis Essay on cycle concepts in geological thinking and their historical influence on stratigraphic practices. Hist Geo Space Sci 13, 39 69. https doi.org 10.5194 hgss-13-39-2022. Galva o, I.L.G., de Castro, D.L., 2017. Contribution of global potential field data to the tectonic reconstruction of the Rio Grande Rise in the South Atlantic. Mar Pet Geol 86, 932 949. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2017.06.048. Geraldes, M.C., Motoki, A., Costa, A., Mota, C.E., Mohriak, W.U., 2013. Geochronology Ar Ar and K Ar of the South Atlantic Post-break-up Magmatism, vol. 369. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 41 74. https doi.org 10.1144 SP369.21. Gomes, J.P., Bunevich, R.B., Tedeschi, L.R., Tucker, M.E., Whitaker, F.F., 2020. Facies classification and patterns of lacustrine carbonate deposition of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazilian pre-salt. Mar Pet Geol 113, 104176. https doi. org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2019.104176. Gomes, P.O., Kilsdonk, B., Grow, T., Minken, J., Barragan, R., 2012. Tectonic evolution of the outer high of Santos Basin, southern Sa o Paulo Plateau, Brazil, and implications for hydrocarbon exploration. In Tectonics and Sedimentation. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa, Oklahoma, pp. 125 142. https doi.org 10.1306 13351550M1003530. Gordon, A.C., Mohriak, W.U., Stanton, N., Santos, A.C., 2023. Magmatic cycles in Santos Basin S.E. Brazil tectonic control in the temporal-spatial distribution and geophysical signature. J South Am Earth Sci 121, 104111. https doi.org 10.1016 j.jsames.2022.104111. Grac a, M.C., Kusznir, N., Gomes Stanton, N.S., 2019. Crustal thickness mapping of the central south Atlantic and the geodynamic development of the Rio Grande rise and Walvis ridge. Mar Pet Geol 101, 230 242. https doi.org 10.1016 j. marpetgeo.2018.12.011. Gresseth, J.L.S., Osmundsen, P.T., Pe ron-Pinvidic, G., 2023. Footwall geomorphology during necking domain evolution a new model for the Fr ya High, mid-Norwegian rifted margin. Basin Res. 35, 1815 1839. https doi.org 10.1111 bre.12775. Hardy, S., McClay, K., 1999. Kinematic modelling of extensional fault-propagation folding. J. Struct. Geol. 21, 695 702. https doi.org 10.1016 S0191-8141 99 00072-3. Haupert, I., Manatschal, G., Decarlis, A., Unternehr, P., 2016. Upper-plate magma-poor rifted margins stratigraphic architecture and structural evolution. Mar Pet Geol 69, 241 261. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2015.10.020. Heilbron, M., Mohriak, W.U., Valeriano, C.M., Milani, E.J., Almeida, J., Tupinamba , M., 2000. From collision to extension the roots of the southeastern continental margin of Brazil. In Atlantic Rifts and Continental Margins, vol. 115. Geophysical Monograph, pp. 1 32. https doi.org 10.1029 GM115p0001. Heilbron, M., Ribeiro, A., Valeriano, C.M., Paciullo, F.V., Almeida, J.C.H., Trouw, R.J.A., Tupinamba , M., Eirado Silva, L.G., 2017. The Ribeira Belt 277 302. https doi.org 10.1007 978-3-319-01715-0 15. Holz, M., Vilas-Boas, D.B., Troccoli, E.B., Santana, V.C., Vidigal-Souza, P.A., 2017. Conceptual models for sequence stratigraphy of continental Rift successions. In Advances in Sequence Stratigraphy. Elsevier Inc., pp. 119 186. https doi.org 10.1016 bs.sats.2017.07.002 Jackson, O., Lawrence, S.R., Hutchinson, I.P., Stocks, A.E., Barnicoat, A.C., Powney, M., 2024. Natural hydrogen sources, systems and exploration plays. Geoenergy 2. https doi.org 10.1144 geoenergy2024-002. Jin, G., Groshong, R.H., 2006. Trishear kinematic modeling of extensional faultpropagation folding. J. Struct. Geol. 28, 170 183. https doi.org 10.1016 j. jsg.2005.09.003. Karner, G.D., 2000. Rifts of the Campos and Santos Basins, Southeastern Brazil Distribution and Timing, vol. 73. AAPG Memoir, pp. 301 315. Karner, G.D., Driscoll, N.W., 1999. Tectonic and Stratigraphic Development of the West African and Eastern Brazilian Margins Insights from Quantitative Basin Modelling, vol. 153. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 11 40. https doi. org 10.1144 GSL.SP.1999.153.01.02. 29 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 Karner, G.D., Gambo a, L.A.P., 2007. Timing and Origin of the South Atlantic Pre-salt Sag Basins and Their Capping Evaporites, vol. 285. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 15 35. https doi.org 10.1144 SP285.2. Kato, N., Lei, X., 2001. Interaction of parallel strike-slip faults and a characteristic distance in the spatial distribution of active faults. Geophys. J. Int. 144, 157 164. https doi.org 10.1046 j.0956-540X.2000.01310.x. Konstantinovskaya, E., Rivero, J.A., Vallega, V., Brodylo, J., Coldham, P., 2023. 3D reservoir simulation of CO 2 injection in a deep saline aquifer of the lower Paleozoic Potsdam sandstone of the st Lawrence platform, Gentilly block, Quebec. Geoenergy 1. https doi.org 10.1144 geoenergy2022-001. Kumar, N., Danforth, A., Nuttall, P., Helwig, J., Bird, D.E., Venkatraman, S., 2013. From Oceanic Crust to Exhumed Mantle a 40 Year 1970 2010 Perspective on the Nature of Crust under the Santos Basin, SE Brazil, vol. 369. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 147 165. https doi.org 10.1144 SP369.16. Kusunose, K., Lei, X., Nishizawa, O., Satoh, T., 1991. Effect of grain size on fractal structure of acoustic emission hypocenter distribution in granitic rock. Phys. Earth Planet. Inter. 67, 194 199. https doi.org 10.1016 0031-9201 91 90070-X. Lei, C., Alves, T.M., Ren, J., Pang, X., Yang, L., Liu, J., 2019. Depositional architecture and structural evolution of a region immediately inboard of the locus of continental breakup Liwan Sub-basin, South China Sea . Bull. Geol. Soc. Am. 131 1 , 1059 1074. https doi.org 10.1130 B35001. Lei, X., Kusunose, K., 1999. Fractal structure and characteristic scale in the distributions of earthquake epicentres, active faults and rivers in Japan. Geophys. J. Int. 139, 754 762. https doi.org 10.1046 j.1365-246x.1999.00977.x. Lei, X., Nishizawa, O., Kusunose, K., 1993. Band-limited heterogeneous fractal structure of earthquakes and acoustic-emission events. Geophys. J. Int. 115, 79 84. https doi.org 10.1111 j.1365-246X.1993.tb05589.x. Lisle, R.J., 2004. Geological structures and maps. Geological Structures and Maps A Practical Guide, third ed. Elsevier. Lisle, R.J., 1992. New method of estimating regional stress orientations application to focal mechanism data of recent British earthquakes. Geophys. J. Int. 110, 276 282. https doi.org 10.1111 j.1365-246X.1992.tb00873.x. Lisle, R.J., Leyshon, P.R., 2004. Stereographic projection techniques for geologists and civil engineers. Geological Strain Analysis, second ed. Cambridge University Press. https doi.org 10.1017 CBO9781139171366. Long, J.J., Imber, J., 2012. Strain compatibility and fault linkage in relay zones on normal faults. J. Struct. Geol. 36, 16 26. https doi.org 10.1016 j.jsg.2011.12.013. Lovecchio, J.P., Abdelmalak, M.M., Planke, S., Silio, O., Rohais, S., Arismendi, S., Vera, E.R., Kulhanek, D.K., Bolatti, N., Ramos, V.A., 2024. Mesozoic Rifting in SW Gondwana and Break-Up of the Southern South Atlantic Ocean, vol. 547. Geological Society, London, Special Publications. https doi.org 10.1144 SP547-2023-140. Lymer, G., Cresswell, D.J.F., Reston, T.J., Bull, J.M., Sawyer, D.S., Morgan, J.K., Stevenson, C., Causer, A., Minshull, T.A., Shillington, D.J., 2019. 3D development of detachment faulting during continental breakup. Earth Planet Sci. Lett. 515, 90 99. https doi.org 10.1016 j.epsl.2019.03.018. Magalha es, A.J.C., Fragoso, D.G.C., Gabaglia, G.P.R., Terra, G.J.S., Melo, A.H. de, Andrade, P.R. de O., Guadagnin, F., Lima-Filho, F.P., 2021. Sequence stratigraphy of clastic and carbonate successions applications for exploration and production of natural resources. Brazilian Journal of Geology 51. https doi.org 10.1590 23174889202120210014. Magalha es, A.J.C., Raja Gabaglia, G.P., Fragoso, D.G.C., Bento Freire, E., Lykawka, R., Arregui, C.D., Silveira, M.M.L., Carpio, K.M.T., De Gasperi, A., Pedrinha, S., Artaga o, V.M., Terra, G.J.S., Bunevich, R.B., Roemers-Oliveira, E., Gomes, J.P., Herna ndez, J.I., Herna ndez, R.M., Bruhn, C.H.L., 2020. High-resolution sequence stratigraphy applied to reservoir zonation and characterisation, and its impact on production performance - shallow marine, fluvial downstream, and lacustrine carbonate settings. Earth Sci. Rev. 210, 103325. https doi.org 10.1016 j. earscirev.2020.103325. Manatschal, G., Bernoulli, D., 1999. Architecture and tectonic evolution of nonvolcanic margins present-day Galicia and ancient Adria. Tectonics 18, 1099 1119. https doi.org 10.1029 1999TC900041. Manatschal, G., Chenin, P., Ghienne, J., Ribes, C., Masini, E., 2022. The syn-rift tectonostratigraphic record of rifted margins Part I insights from the Alpine Tethys. Basin Res. 34, 457 488. https doi.org 10.1111 bre.12627. Marrett, R., Allmendinger, R.W., 1990. Kinematic analysis of fault-slip data. J. Struct. Geol. 12, 973 986. https doi.org 10.1016 0191-8141 90 90093-E. Martins-Neto, M.A., Catuneanu, O., 2010. Rift sequence stratigraphy. Mar Pet Geol 27, 247 253. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2009.08.001. Maus, S., Barckhausen, U., Berkenbosch, H., Bournas, N., Brozena, J., Childers, V., Dostaler, F., Fairhead, J.D., Finn, C., von Frese, R.R.B., Gaina, C., Golynsky, S., Kucks, R., Lu hr, H., Milligan, P., Mogren, S., Mu ller, R.D., Olesen, O., Pilkington, M., Saltus, R., Schreckenberger, B., The bault, E., Caratori Tontini, F., 2009. EMAG2 a 2 arc min resolution Earth Magnetic Anomaly Grid compiled from satellite, airborne, and marine magnetic measurements. G-cubed 10. https doi.org 10.1029 2009GC002471 n a-n a. McClay, K.R., Dooley, T., Whitehouse, P., Fullarton, L., Chantraprasert, S., 2004. 3D Analogue Models of Rift Systems Templates for 3D Seismic Interpretation, vol. 29. Geological Society, London, Memoirs, pp. 101 115. https doi.org 10.1144 GSL. MEM.2004.029.01.11. McClay, K.R., Dooley, T., Whitehouse, P.S., Anadon-Ruiz, S., 2005. 4D analogue models of extensional fault systems in asymmetric rifts 3D visualizations and comparisons with natural examples. Geological Society, London, Petroleum Geology Conference Series 6, 1543 1556. https doi.org 10.1144 0061543. McKenzie, D., 1978. Some remarks on the development of sedimentary basins. Earth Planet Sci. Lett. 40, 25 32. https doi.org 10.1016 0012-821X 78 90071-7. Minzoni, M., Cantelli, A., Thornton, J., Wignall, B., 2021. Seismic-scale Geometries and Sequence-Stratigraphic Architecture of Early Cretaceous Syn-Post Rift Carbonate Systems, vol. 509. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, Presalt Section, Brazil, pp. 105 126. https doi.org 10.1144 SP509-2019-78. Mizusaki, A.M.P., Petrini, R., Bellieni, P., Comin-Chiaramonti, P., Dias, J., De Min, A., Piccirillo, E.M., 1992. Basalt magmatism along the passive continental margin of SE Brazil Campos basin . Contrib. Mineral. Petrol. 111, 143 160. https doi.org 10.1007 BF00348948. Mizusaki, A.M.P., Thomaz Filho, A., 2004. O magmatismo po s-paleozo ico no Brasil. Geologia do continente sul-americano evoluc a o da obra de Fernando Fla vio Marques de Almeida. Becca, Sa o Paulo, pp. 281 291. Modica, C.J., Brush, E.R., 2004. Postrift sequence stratigraphy, paleogeography, and fill history of the deep-water Santos Basin, offshore southeast Brazil. Am Assoc Pet Geol Bull 88, 923 945. https doi.org 10.1306 01220403043. Mohn, G., Manatschal, G., Beltrando, M., Masini, E., Kusznir, N., 2012. Necking of continental crust in magma-poor rifted margins evidence from the fossil Alpine Tethys margins. Tectonics 31. https doi.org 10.1029 2011TC002961 n a-n a. Mohriak, W., 2020. Genesis and evolution of the South Atlantic volcanic islands offshore Brazil. Geo Mar. Lett. 40, 1 33. https doi.org 10.1007 s00367-019-00631-w. Mohriak, W.U., Rosendahl, B.R., 2003. Transform Zones in the South Atlantic Rifted Continental Margins. Moreira, J.L.P., Madeira, C.V., Gil, J.A., Machado, M.A.P., 2007. Carta Estratigra fica da Bacia de Santos. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 15, 531 549. Morley, C.K., 2010. Stress re-orientation along zones of weak fabrics in rifts an explanation for pure extension in oblique rift segments Earth Planet Sci. Lett. 297, 667 673. https doi.org 10.1016 j.epsl.2010.07.022. Morley, C.K., Gabdi, S., Seusutthiya, K., 2007. Fault superimposition and linkage resulting from stress changes during rifting examples from 3D seismic data, Phitsanulok Basin, Thailand. J. Struct. Geol. 29, 646 663. https doi.org 10.1016 j.jsg.2006.11.005. Morley, C.K., Haranya, C., Phoosongsee, W., Pongwapee, S., Kornsawan, A., Wonganan, N., 2004. Activation of rift oblique and rift parallel pre-existing fabrics during extension and their effect on deformation style examples from the rifts of Thailand. J. Struct. Geol. 26, 1803 1829. https doi.org 10.1016 j. jsg.2004.02.014. Moulin, M., Aslanian, D., Rabineau, M., Patriat, M., Matias, L., 2013. Kinematic Keys of the Santos Namibe Basins, vol. 369. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 91 107. https doi.org 10.1144 SP369.3. Nemc ok, M., 2015. Rifts and Passive Margins, Rifts and Passive Margins. Cambridge University Press. https doi.org 10.1017 CBO9781139198844. Nirrengarten, M., Manatschal, G., Yuan, X.P., Kusznir, N.J., Maillot, B., 2016. Application of the critical Coulomb wedge theory to hyper-extended, magma-poor rifted margins. Earth Planet Sci. Lett. 442, 121 132. https doi.org 10.1016 j. epsl.2016.03.004. Oliveira, L.C. de, Rancan, C.C., Sartorato, A.C.L., Farias, F.A., Pereira, E., 2021. Drowning unconformities on presalt carbonate platforms examples from the Itapema Formation Lower Cretaceous , Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 577, 110570. https doi.org 10.1016 j. palaeo.2021.110570. Osmundsen, P.T., Pe ron-Pinvidic, G., 2018. Crustal-scale fault interaction at rifted margins and the formation of domain-bounding breakaway complexes insights from offshore Norway. Tectonics 37, 935 964. https doi.org 10.1002 2017TC004792. Ouillon, G., Castaing, C., Sornette, D., 1996. Hierarchical geometry of faulting. J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 101, 5477 5487. https doi.org 10.1029 95JB02242. Peacock, D.C.P., Knipe, R.J., Sanderson, D.J., 2000. Glossary of normal faults. J. Struct. Geol. 22, 291 305. https doi.org 10.1016 S0191-8141 00 80102-9. Peacock, D.C.P., Sanderson, D.J., 1994. Geometry and development of relay ramps in normal fault systems. Am Assoc Pet Geol Bull 78. https doi.org 10.1306 BDFF9046-1718-11D7-8645000102C1865D. Pereira, M.J., Macedo, J.M., 1990. Santos Basin the outlook for a new petroleum province on the southeastern Brazilian continental shelf. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 4, 3 11. Pe rez-Gussinye , M., Andre s-Marti nez, M., Arau jo, M., Xin, Y., Armitage, J., Morgan, J.P., 2020. Lithospheric strength and rift migration controls on synrift stratigraphy and breakup unconformities at rifted margins examples from numerical models, the Atlantic and south China Sea margins. Tectonics 39, 1 37. https doi.org 10.1029 2020TC006255. Pe ron-Pinvidic, G., Manatschal, G., Masini, E., Sutra, E., Flament, J.M., Haupert, I., Unternehr, P., 2017. Unravelling the along-strike variability of the Angola Gabon rifted margin a mapping approach. Geological Society, London, Special Publications 438 1 , 49 76. https doi.org 10.1144 SP438. Petit, J.P., 1987. Criteria for the sense of movement on fault surfaces in brittle rocks. J. Struct. Geol. 9, 597 608. https doi.org 10.1016 0191-8141 87 90145-3. Price, N.J., Cosgrove, J.W., 1990. Analysis of Geological Structures. Cambridge University Press. Prosser, S., 1993. Rift-related Linked Depositional Systems and Their Seismic Expression, vol. 71. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 35 66. https doi. org 10.1144 GSL.SP.1993.071.01.03. Ranero, C.R., Pe rez-Gussinye , M., 2010. Sequential faulting explains the asymmetry and extension discrepancy of conjugate margins. Nature 468, 294 299. https doi.org 10.1038 nature09520. Redfield, T.F., Osmundsen, P.T., 2013. The long-term topographic response of a continent adjacent to a hyperextended margin a case study from Scandinavia. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull. 125, 184 200. https doi.org 10.1130 B30691.1. Ribes, C., Ghienne, J.-F., Manatschal, G., Dall Asta, N., Stockli, D.F., Galster, F., Gillard, M., Karner, G.D., 2020. The Gre s Singuliers of the Mont Blanc region France 30 P.R.O. Andrade et al. Marine and Petroleum Geology 177 2025 107384 and Switzerland stratigraphic response to rifting and crustal necking in the Alpine Tethys. Int. J. Earth Sci. 109, 2325 2352. https doi.org 10.1007 s00531-02001902-z. Rotevatn, A., Jackson, C.A.-L., Tvedt, A.B.M., Bell, R.E., Bl kkan, I., 2019. How do normal faults grow J. Struct. Geol. 125, 174 184. https doi.org 10.1016 j. jsg.2018.08.005. Rowland, S.M., Duebendorfer, E.M., Schiefelbein, I.M., 2007. Structural Analysis and Synthesis A Laboratory Course in Structural Geology. Wiley-Blackwell. Schmitt, R. da S., Fragoso, R. de A., Collins, A.S., 2018. Suturing Gondwana in the Cambrian the Orogenic events of the final amalgamation. In Geology of Southwest Gondwana. Springer International Publishing, pp. 411 432. https doi.org 10.1007 978-3-319-68920-3 15. Schmitt, R. da S., Trouw, R., Van Schmus, W.R., Armstrong, R., Stanton, N.S.G., 2016. The tectonic significance of the Cabo Frio Tectonic Domain in the SE Brazilian margin a Paleoproterozoic through Cretaceous saga of a reworked continental margin. Brazilian J. Geology 46, 37 66. https doi.org 10.1590 23174889201620150025. Schmitt, R. da S., Trouw, R.A.J., Alves da Silva, E., de Jesus, J.V.M., da Costa, L.F.M., Passarelli, C.R., 2023. The role of crustal-scale shear zones in SW Gondwana consolidation transatlantic correlation. Geological Society, London, Special Publications 531, 149 187. https doi.org 10.1144 SP531-2022-278. Schmitt, R. da S., Trouw, R.A.J., Van Schmus, W.R., Passchier, C.W., 2008. Cambrian orogeny in the Ribeira Belt SE Brazil and correlations within west Gondwana. ties that bind underwater. Geological Society, London, Special Publications 294, 279 296. https doi.org 10.1144 SP294.15. Seminsky, K.Zh, Cheremnykh, A.V., 2011. Jointing patterns and stress tensors in Cenozoic sediments of the Baikal rift development of the structural-genetic approach. Russ. Geol. Geophys. 52, 353 367. https doi.org 10.1016 j. rgg.2011.02.008. Sharp, I.R., Gawthorpe, R.L., Underhill, J.R., Gupta, S., 2000. Fault-propagation folding in extensional settings examples of structural style and synrift sedimentary response from the Suez rift, Sinai, Egypt. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull. 112, 1877 1899. https doi. org 10.1130 0016-7606 2000 112 1877 FPFIES 2.0.CO 2. Siler, D.L., 2023. Structural discontinuities and their control on hydrothermal systems in the great basin, USA. In Transactions - Geothermal Resources Council. Geothermal Resources Council, pp. 1824 1835. https doi.org 10.1144 geoenergy2023-009. Soares, D.M., Alves, T.M., Terrinha, P., 2012. The breakup sequence and associated lithospheric breakup surface their significance in the context of rifted continental margins West Iberia and Newfoundland margins, North Atlantic . Earth Planet Sci. Lett. 355 356 , 311 326. https doi.org 10.1016 j.epsl.2012.08.036. Stanton, N., Kusznir, N., Gordon, A., Schmitt, R., 2019. Architecture and tectonomagmatic evolution of the Campos rifted margin control of OCT structure by basement inheritance. Mar Pet Geol 100, 43 59. https doi.org 10.1016 j. marpetgeo.2018.10.043. Stanton, N., Schmitt, R., Galdeano, A., Maia, M., Mane, M., 2010. Crustal structure of the southeastern Brazilian margin, Campos Basin, from aeromagnetic data new kinematic constraints. Tectonophysics 490, 15 27. https doi.org 10.1016 j. tecto.2010.04.008. Torsvik, T.H., Rousse, S., Labails, C., Smethurst, M.A., 2009. A new scheme for the opening of the South Atlantic Ocean and the dissection of an Aptian salt basin. Geophys. J. Int. 177, 1315 1333. https doi.org 10.1111 j.1365246X.2009.04137.x. Trudgill, B., Cartwright, J., 1994. Relay-ramp forms and normal-fault linkages, Canyonlands National Park, Utah. Geol. Soc. Am. Bull. 106, 1143 1157. https doi. org 10.1130 0016-7606 1994 106 1143 RRFANF 2.3.CO 2. Ventisky, E., Gilfillan, S.M.V., 2023. Assessment of the onshore storage capacity of hydrogen in Argentina s natural gas fields. Geoenergy 1. https doi.org 10.1144 geoenergy2023-017. Vital, J.C., dos, S., Ade, M.V.B., Morelatto, R., Lupinacci, W.M., 2023. Compartmentalization and stratigraphic-structural trapping in pre-salt carbonate reservoirs of the Santos Basin a case study in the Iara complex. Mar Pet Geol 151, 106163. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2023.106163. Wescott, W.A., Krebs, W.N., Dolson, J.C., Karamat, S.A., Nummedal, D., 1996. Rift basin sequence stratigraphy some examples from the Gulf of Suez. GeoArabia Manama 1, 343 358. https doi.org 10.2113 geoarabia0102343. Xu, W., Yao, C., Yin, X., Xiong, L., Wang, J., An, S., Chen, G., 2024. Crustal configuration beneath the Santos and Campos Basins, southeastern Brazil a refined Moho depth model based on gravity and seismic data in spherical coordinates. Phys. Chem. Earth, Parts A B C 135, 103661. https doi.org 10.1016 j.pce.2024.103661. Yin, X., Yao, C., Wang, J., Xu, W., Zheng, Y., Li, Z., Mu, W., 2024. A constrained 3D gravity inversion for complex density distributions application to Brazil rifted continental margin. Tectonophysics 874, 230236. https doi.org 10.1016 j. tecto.2024.230236. Zala n, P.V., Severino, M. do C.G., Rigoti, C.A., Magnavita, L.P., de Oliveira, J.A.B., Vianna, A.R., 2011. An entirely new 3-D view of the crustal and mantle structure of a south Atlantic passive margin, Santos, Campos and Espi rito Santo basins, Brazil. In Search and Discovery Article. AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition, Houston, Texas, USA, p. 13. 31

[END_OF_PAPER]

https doi.org 10.11606 issn.2316-9095.v24-200523 Revista do Instituto de Geocie ncias - USP Geol. USP, Se r. cient., Sa o Paulo, v. 24, n. 1, p. 51-72, Marc o 2024 Caracterizac a o e restaurac a o estrutural de uma a rea do Pre -sal da Bacia de Santos e o impacto da paleogeografia no controle da deposic a o das fa cies no reservato rio Characterization and structural restoration of a Pre-salt area of the Santos Basinand the impact of paleogeography on the control of facies deposition in the reservoir Renato Kramberger Carvalho1 , Claudio Limeira Mello2 , Olinto Gomes de Souza Junior1 1 Petrobras S.A., Centro Empresarial Senado, Av. Henrique Valadares, 28, 7 andar, Torre B, CEP 20231-030, Centro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, BR. renatokcarvalho petrobras.com.br olinto petrobras.com.br 2 Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Instituto de Geocie ncias, Departamento de Geologia. Rio de Janeiro, RJ, BR limeira geologia.ufrj.br Recebido em 28 de setembro de 2022 aceito em 18 de dezembro de 2023. RESUMO O forte controle estrutural exercido sobre a deposic a o dos carbonatos da Formac a o Barra Velha Aptiano , Pre -sal da Bacia de Santos, durante as fases rifte e sag condicionou os processos estratigra ficos e sedimentolo gicos que controlaram a distribuic a o e a qualidade desses reservato rios. O entendimento de como e com que intensidade a evoluc a o estrutural impactou a distribuic a o das fa cies carbona ticas e crucial para se fazer um mapeamento preditivo dos reservato rios. O presente estudo foi desenvolvido na a rea de Iracema, campo de Tupi, onde foram mapeados cinco horizontes si smicos e 74 falhas objetivando a caracterizac a o e restaurac a o estrutural e a reconstruc a o da paleogeografia dos reservato rios a e poca da deposic a o da Formac a o Barra Velha, se restringindo ao intervalo depositado durante a fase sag da bacia. Foi construi da uma superfi cie de paleobatimetria para os horizontes restaurados referentes aos limites basais dos intervalos sag inferior e sag superior, considerando as profundidades de deposic a o dos carbonatos com base em depo sitos ana logos recentes, de acordo com estudos anteriores realizados na pro pria bacia. Para exemplificar a aplicac a o da ana lise paleobatime trica realizada, foi conduzida uma modelagem de processos estratigra ficos e sedimentolo gicos no intervalo superior da fase sag, permitindo reproduzir cena rios da arquitetura interna da plataforma carbona tica. Os resultados demonstram que a restaurac a o realizada apresenta uma melhor e preditiva caracterizac a o faciolo gica do reservato rio, que ira orientar a definic a o da distribuic a o de porosidade e permeabilidade em trabalhos de caracterizac a o 3D do reservato rio. Palavras-chave Formac a o Barra Velha Carbonatos Arcabouc o estrutural Paleobatimetria Modelagem de processos. ABSTRACT The strong structural control exerted on the deposition of carbonates from the Barra Velha Formation Aptian , pre-salt of the Santos Basin, during the rift and sag phases conditioned the stratigraphic and sedimentological processes that controlled the distribution and quality of these reservoirs. The understanding of how and with what intensity the structural evolution impacted the distribution of carbonate facies is crucial to carry out a predictive mapping of the reservoirs. The present study was conducted in the Iracema area, Tupi field, where 5 seismic horizons and 74 faults were mapped with the objective of characterizing and restoring the structural framework and reconstructing the paleogeography of the reservoirs during the deposition of the Barra Velha Formation. The study focuses on the interval deposited during the sag phase of the basin. A paleobathymetry surface was constructed for the restored horizons referring to the basal limits of the lower and upper sag intervals, considering the carbonate deposition depths based on recent analogous deposits and in accordance with previous studies carried out in the basin. To exemplify the application of this paleobathymetric analysis, a stratigraphic-sedimentological forward modeling was executed in the upper interval of the sag phase, allowing to reproduce scenarios of the internal architecture of the carbonate platform. The results demonstrate that the restored surface presents a better and predictive faciological characterization of the reservoir, which will condition the definition of the porosity and permeability distribution in 3D reservoir characterization works. Keywords Barra Velha Formation Carbonates Structural framework Paleobathymetry Forward modeling. Disponi vel on-line no enderec o www.igc.usp.br geologiausp - 51 - Caracterizac a o de a rea do Pre -sal da Bacia de Santos INTRODUC A O A histo ria explorato ria da Bacia de Santos, sem grande importa ncia na produc a o nacional ate o ini cio dos anos 2000, comec ou a ganhar destaque e releva ncia com as novas descobertas do Pre -sal. Neste contexto se deu a descoberta da a rea de Tupi hoje denominado campo de Tupi , em 2006, no alto externo da Bacia de Santos. Os reservato rios nesta a rea sa o compostos por depo sitos carbona ticos das fases rifte e po s-rifte esta tambe m denominada de fase sag, termo que sera utilizado neste trabalho , constituindo a chamada sec a o Pre -sal, representando um novo play de classe mundial, descoberto na margem continental brasileira Chang et al., 2008 Artaga o, 2018 . Dada a releva ncia econo mica destas descobertas, muitos trabalhos esta o sendo realizados na avaliac a o regional e na ana lise estratigra fica e de fa cies destes depo sitos carbona ticos. Entretanto, a caracterizac a o de detalhe dos reservato rios do Pre -sal ainda e um desafio, principalmente quanto a previsibilidade da qualidade do reservato rio, que e controlada pela distribuic a o de fa cies. Uma adequada caracterizac a o estrutural e a reconstruc a o da paleogeografia dos reservato rios a e poca da deposic a o, o que constitui a proposta central do estudo aqui apresentado, e fundamental para melhorar a previsibilidade das fa cies dos reservato rios carbona ticos existentes na Bacia de Santos Dias et al., 1988 Wright e Barnett, 2015 . A a rea de Iracema Figura 1 , localizada dentro dos limites do campo de Tupi, foi selecionada para este estudo por estar em um contexto estrutural distinto no alto externo da Bacia de Santos, apresentando uma orientac a o estrutural NW-SE em uma regia o com orientac a o estrutural predominante NE-SW, possivelmente influenciada pelo denominado lineamento Iracema Magnavita et al., 2010 . A este lineamento e atribui do um importante papel nas reativac o es das falhas rifte durante a deposic a o dos carbonatos da fase sag. A tecto nica ativa durante a fase sag implica em um forte controle estrutural na deposic a o das fa cies carbona ticas, que sera discutido no decorrer do trabalho. Uma incerteza cri tica nos modelos de subsuperfi cie e a geometria estrutural e a cinema tica dos eventos. A restaurac a o estrutural pode ser a u nica maneira pra tica para validar um modelo estrutural e entender a seque ncia de eventos e suas incertezas. Neste contexto de incertezas e considerando-se reservato rios mais complexos e com menor acesso a coleta de dados, que apresentam alto custo e dependem tempo na implantac a o dos projetos, as restaurac o es podem ter um valor agregado enorme para os planos de desenvolvimento da produc a o Groshong Jr. et al., 2012 . Buscando-se representar melhor os padro es de deformac a o associados a falhas, ale m da modelagem meca nica de falhas e sistemas de falhas, a indu stria e a academia te m desenvolvido o conceito de restaurac a o 2D Dunbar e Cook, 2003 Maerten e Maerten, 2006 e 3D Maerten, 2007 . O desenvolvimento destas ferramentas tem o intuito de melhor predizer os condicionantes de sistemas petroli feros 3D de a reas de interesse, construir superfi cies de paleo-relevo para serem usadas no controle de deposic a o dos sedimentos, prever as condic o es de variac a o de esforc os e, com isso, predizer o modelo de fraturas, ale m de serem utilizados para validar interpretac o es estruturais. No presente estudo foi realizada a caracterizac a o estrutural e a reconstruc a o da paleogeografia a e poca da deposic a o do intervalo sag dos reservato rios carbona ticos da Formac a o Barra Velha, que se depositaram em uma condic a o de reativac o es de falhas que condicionaram a pa- ACF Alto de Cabo Frio AF Plataforma de Floriano polis DSP Dorsal de Sa o Paulo. Figura 1. Localizac a o da a rea de estudo AE e poc os selecionados na a rea A a G . O reta ngulo vermelho corresponde a a rea interpretada no dado si smico. - 52 - Geol. USP, Se r. cient., Sa o Paulo, v. 24, n. 1, p. 51-72, Marc o 2024 Carvalho, R. K. et al. leogeografia e por conseque ncia a distribuic a o das fa cies. Atrave s da te cnica da restaurac a o 2D de multi-sec o es, e possi vel restaurar estas geometrias das superfi cies a fim de melhorar a previsibilidade da distribuic a o das fa cies carbona ticas existentes na a rea de interesse. A Bacia de Santos situa-se na margem continental sudeste do Brasil, entre os paralelos 23o e 28o sul, abrangendo os litorais dos estados do Rio de Janeiro, Sa o Paulo, Parana e Santa Catarina. Ocupa uma a rea de cerca de 350.000 km2 ate a cota batime trica de 3.000 m, sendo limitada geograficamente da Bacia de Campos, ao norte, pelo Alto de Cabo Frio e da Bacia de Pelotas, ao sul, pela Plataforma de Floriano polis Figura 1 . O embasamento da bacia e representado pelo Sistema Oroge nico da Mantiqueira, correspondendo a terrenos metamo rficos e i gneos com estruturac a o predominantemente NE-SW, formados durante a amalgamac a o da porc a o oeste do Gondwana durante o processo oroge nico conhecido como evento Brasiliano no Neoproterozoico Almeida et al., 1981 Heilbron et al., 2004 Almeida et al., 2013 . A bacia foi formada em um regime tecto nico distensivo durante a fragmentac a o do supercontinente Gondwana Ocidental, iniciada no Eocreta ceo, que culminou com a separac a o entre o Brasil e a A frica e a abertura do Atla ntico Sul, sendo classificada como uma ti pica bacia de margem distensiva Milani et al., 2007 . Os processos de rifteamento que originaram a Bacia de Santos nuclearam-se ao longo de estruturas preexistentes do embasamento, que governaram a arquitetura das principais feic o es do sistema rifte, com as principais falhas normais herdando a direc a o NE-SW. Esta direc a o e predominante em uma estrutura conhecida como Alto Externo da Bacia de Santos Gomes et al., 2008 e 2012 , onde esta localizada a a rea do presente estudo. Esta direc a o predominante do embasamento e obliqua a direc a o de abertura do rifte E-W resultando em regime tecto nico geral de transtensa o sinistral durante a abertura da bacia Macedo, 1990 Meisling et al., 2001 Milani et al., 2005 . Os estudos de Dehler et al. 2016 identificaram um lineamento magne tico denominado Helmut, que e o limite entre o Rifte Inferior e o Exterior Rigoti, 2015 , que possui direc a o NE-SW na Bacia de Santos e que sofre uma inflexa o para a direc a o N-S na Bacia de Campos. Este lineamento traz consigo a mesma direc a o das zonas de cisalhamento neoproterozoicas e possui uma extensa o aproximada de 1000 km. Conforme interpretado a partir de mapas magne ticos e gravime tricos, o lineamento Helmut, conecta estruturalmente a s estruturas NNE das Bacias de Campos e Santos, por meio de uma zona de cisalhamento fra gil, obliqua a estrutura do rifte da Bacia de Santos, atuando como uma grande zona de transfere ncia. No Aptiano tardio esta estrutura atuou como uma zona de cisalhamento sinistral transtativa, que perturba a direc a o das falhas NNE na direc a o NE pro ximo a zona de falha, e reativa falhas do rifte, desorganizando a bacia evapori tica do Atla ntico Sul, promovendo a movimentac a o do sal e gerando domos principalmente de halita. Estruturas de menor expressa o ocorrem nas direc o es ENE-WSW e E-W Zala n e Oliveira, 2005 , sendo tambe m observadas zonas de transfere ncia com orientac a o NW-SE, induzidas pela abertura obliqua da Bacia de Santos Meisling et al., 2001 , afetando tanto o embasamento como unidades mais novas, ate o Eoceno, ao ponto de remarcar domi nios diferenciados da tecto nica sali fera, condicionando a estruturac a o dos domos salinos Souza, 2008 Rigoti, 2015 . Segundo Meisling et al. 2001 estas estruturas NW progressivamente mudam para a direc a o E-W perto da zona de transic a o continente-crosta ocea nica. Magnavita et al. 2010 , analisando as falhas e mapas de contorno estrutural da Bacia de Santos na sec a o Pre -sal, ao norte da a rea de estudo, identificaram uma importante feic a o, denominada de S de Santos, que marca a mudanc a do arcabouc o estrutural. Esta feic a o esta relacionada a mudanc a da orientac a o das falhas de direc a o NE-SW para as direc o es NW-SE e N-S, influenciada pela presenc a de zonas de transfere ncia regionais NW-SE. Uma destas zonas de transfere ncia, denominada de Iracema Magnavita et al., 2010 , e de especial interesse para a a rea investigada no presente estudo devido a sua proximidade, modificando a direc a o das estruturas presentes na a rea de Iracema, impondo a s falhas uma orientac a o principal NW-SE. A fase po s-rifte ou fase sag da bacia, iniciada a partir do Eoaptiano, e caracterizada por uma subside ncia regional associada ao resfriamento litosfe rico Moreira et al., 2007 . A atividade tecto nica associada a s falhas diminui, restringindo-se a reativac o es das principais falhas da fase rifte Dias, 2005 Mohriak et al., 2008 . Diversos autores, no entanto, identificam durante a fase sag definida por Moreira et al. 2007 uma tecto nica ativa na Bacia de Santos, com a movimentac a o de falhas e criac a o de espac o durante a deposic a o dos carbonatos Karner e Gambo a, 2007 Buckley et al., 2015 Faria et al., 2017 . Os trabalhos de Torsvik et al. 2009 e Moulin et al. 2013 propo em que a tecto nica sin-rifte estaria afetando inclusive a deposic a o do sal que esta o sobrepostos aos carbonatos. Nos trabalhos de Dehler et al. 2023 e Adriano et al. 2022 e proposta uma u ltima fase rifte concomitante a deposic a o do intervalo superior dos carbonatos da Formac a o Barra Velha. De acordo com Moreira et al. 2007 , as rochas que constituem o Pre -sal da Bacia de Santos sa o relacionadas a evoluc a o da bacia durante as fases rifte e po s-rifte, sendo reunidas no Grupo Guaratiba Figura 2 , composto pelas formac o es Camboriu derrames de basaltos tolei ticos, ocorridos durante o Neocomiano , Pic arras depositada durante o peri odo de maior atividade tecto nica, no andar Barremiano, e composta de arenitos e pelitos de composic a o talco-estevensi tica e folhelhos escuros depositados nas porc o es distais da bacia , Itapema de idade Neobarremiano-Eoaptiano e constitui da por rudstones, grainstones Geol. USP, Se r. cient., Sa o Paulo, v. 24, n. 1, p. 51-72, Marc o 2024 - 53 - CONTEXTO GEOLO GICO Caracterizac a o de a rea do Pre -sal da Bacia de Santos e packstones biocla sticos, nos altos estruturais originados pela atividade tecto nica, e intercalac o es de mudstones, lamitos e folhelhos escuros, ricos em mate ria orga nica, nos baixos estruturais e Barra Velha depositada durante o Aptiano, em ambiente transicional entre continental e marinho raso, e composta por calca rios estromatoli ticos, laminitos microbiais e microbialitos ricos em talco e argilas magnesianas, nas porc o es associadas a altos estruturais presentes no alto externo da Bacia de Santos, e folhelhos e folhelhos carbona ticos nas porc o es distais intercalados com as fa cies in situ podem ocorrer tambe m grainstones e packstones compostos por fragmentos dos estromato litos e bioclastos . O limite entre as formac o es Itapema e Barra Velha e a discorda ncia Pre -Alagoas DPA , datada em 123,1 Ma e, de acordo com Moreira et al. 2007 , corresponde ao limite entre as fases rifte e po s-rifte ou fase sag . No entanto, trabalhos mais recentes Buckley et al., 2015 Wright e Barnett, 2015 Faria et al., 2017 Farias et al., 2019 propo em que a passagem para a fase po s-rifte seja associada a discorda ncia Intra-Alagoas, de idade 117 Ma, definida por Moreira et al. 2007 , durante a deposic a o da Formac a o Barra Velha. Com esta nova interpretac a o, a Formac a o Barra Velha foi depositada em dois regimes tecto nicos distintos, sendo a porc a o inferior em um contexto tecto nico rifte, com a presenc a de geometria de cunha, ainda que menos proeminente do que as feic o es observadas no rifte inferior formac o es Pic arras e Itapema . Esta diferenc a pode estar associada a taxa de movimentac a o das falhas que criaram o espac o ou a diferenc a da taxa de sedimentac a o dos carbonatos sin-rifte Buckley et al., 2015 . A porc a o superior da Formac a o Barra Velha foi depositada em contexto tecto nico po s-rifte, durante o processo de subside ncia regional associada ao resfriamento litosfe rico Moreira et al., 2007 , adquirindo um padra o de preenchimento do tipo sag. Neste peri odo, com uma baixa atividade tecto nica associada a falhas, existiram falhas ainda ativas durante a deposic a o dos carbonatos, relacionadas a reativac o es das principais falhas da fase rifte Dias, 2005 Mohriak et al., 2008 Karner e Gambo a, 2007 . Como citado acima os trabalhos de Torsvik et al. 2009 e Moulin et al. 2013 consideram que DIA Discorda ncia Intra-Alagoas DPA Discorda ncia Pre -Alagoas. modificado de Moreira et al. 2007 . Figura 2. Diagrama estratigra fico da Bacia de Santos. O reta ngulo vermelho representa o intervalo estratigra fico abordado no presente trabalho intervalo superior da Formac a o Barra Velha . Foi realizada uma modificac a o do diagrama original, alterando o topo da seque ncia rifte para junto da discorda ncia Intra-Alagoas, conforme proposto por Buckley et al. 2015 e Wright e Barnett 2015 . - 54 - Geol. USP, Se r. cient., Sa o Paulo, v. 24, n. 1, p. 51-72, Marc o 2024 Carvalho, R. K. et al. o intervalo superior da Fm. Barra Velha estaria incluso ainda em uma fase sin-rifte. Adriano et al. 2022 propo em uma terceira fase rifte rifte tardio para a Bacia de Santos concomitante a deposic a o da parte superior da Fm. Barra Velha e esta estaria associada a uma direc a o principal dos lineamentos NW-SE, que predominam na a rea de Iracema. Wright e Barnett 2015 contestaram a origem microbial dos carbonatos da Formac a o Barra Velha, propondo um modelo abio tico para a sua deposic a o, em um ambiente lacustre altamente alcalino, sem influe ncia marinha. A influe ncia marinha e descartada devido a ause ncia de fo sseis marinhos, incluindo fo sseis ti picos de ambiente marinho restrito como foramini feros milioli deos. A ause ncia de minerais de sulfato, como gipsita e anidrita, tambe m corrobora que estes carbonatos na o se depositaram em ambiente de a gua marinha. Nas observac o es feitas por Wright e Barnett 2015 em amostras macrosco picas e em la minas delgadas, foram verificadas poucas evide ncias da ocorre ncia de atividade e presenc a microbiana e, com isso, para os autores, parece impro prio usar o nome microbialito. Apesar dos diferentes modelos paleoambientais discutidos na literatura para os carbonatos do Pre -sal, em todas as melhores fa cies reservato rios se depositariam nos altos estruturais, evidenciando o controle da paleogeografia na deposic a o das fa cies carbona ticas. Artaga o 2018 apresenta uma proposta de distribuic a o das fa cies em func a o da energia e batimetria do lago, evidenciando a necessidade de se determinar a paleobatimetria do lago para a correta predic a o das fa cies. Finalizando a fase po s-rifte da Bacia de Santos, apo s o ciclo carbona tico da Formac a o Barra Velha, com topo definido em 113 Ma, ocorreu a deposic a o da Formac a o Ariri Figura 2 . Trabalhos recentes te m contestado esta idade do ini cio da deposic a o do sal Lima et al., 2018 Pietzsch et al., 2020 Tedeschi et al., 2017, 2019 . A partir da correlac a o de iso topos de carbono com as sec o es do Tethyan foi possi vel correlacionar o fim da deposic a o dos evaporitos ao intervalo 1 do Evento Ano xido Ocea nico do Aptiano datado entre 125 e 124 Ma Tedeschi et al., 2019 . No entanto o trabalho de Szatmari et al. 2021 contesta estas novas idades atrave s de datac o es utilizando argo nio. Estes propo em no seu trabalho uma idade entre 116 e110 Ma, mais usual para o intervalo evapori tico. A Fm. Ariri e constitui da por evaporitos depositados em um intervalo de tempo estimado entre 0,7 a 1 Ma, segundo estudo de Dias 1998 , durante o Neoaptiano Moreira et al., 2007 . Os evaporitos de maior ocorre ncia na Bacia de Santos sa o a halita e a anidrita, entretanto tambe m se constata sais mais solu veis, tais como taquidrita, carnalita e silvinita Rodriguez et al., 2018 . No limite entre o Aptiano e o Albiano 112Ma , o processo de ruptura efetivamente se propaga em direc a o a Bacia de Santos. Durante o Albiano 106Ma ocorre enfim o breakup e abertura do Oceano Atla ntico Equatorial, permitindo a conexa o franca entre o Oceano Atla ntico Sul e o Oceano Atla ntico Central Oceano Thetis , finalizando assim o processo de separac a o do Gondwana Ocidental. Apo s o breakup inicia-se a fase drifte da bacia Figura 2 , que e composta pelos grupos Camburi composto por carbonatos marinhos e folhelhos radioativos e margas , Frade sistema de leques aluviais ate pelitos e arenitos batiais, depositados do final do Cenomaniano ate o limite Creta ceo Paleo geno, que culminou com uma regressa o marinha no final do Creta ceo e Itamambuca sedimentos depositados do Paleo geno ate o presente, correspondendo a depo sitos de leques aluviais proximais que gradam para pelitos e arenitos batiais nas porc o es distais, com ocorre ncias de sedimentac a o carbona tica mista pro ximo a quebra da plataforma . A seque ncia drifte e bastante deformada por tecto nica gravitacional, em func a o da movimentac a o do intervalo de sal, do relevo preexistente e do progressivo basculamento do embasamento Pichel et al., 2020 . Geol. USP, Se r. cient., Sa o Paulo, v. 24, n. 1, p. 51-72, Marc o 2024 - 55 - BASE DE DADOS E ME TODOS O estudo foi dividido em quatro etapas Figura 3 , abordando os seguintes to picos construc a o do arcabouc o estrutural-estratigra fico, atrave s da correlac a o de poc os e interpretac a o si smica reconstruc a o estrutural de horizontes estratigra ficos da a rea de interesse, atrave s da restaurac a o de mu ltiplas sec o es construc a o de mapas de paleobatimetria para o intervalo estratigra fico de interesse e aplicac a o de uma das superfi cies paleobatime trica restauradas em uma modelagem de processos estratigra ficos e sedimentolo gicos, realizada no intervalo superior da fase sag. Para a etapa de restaurac a o estrutural foi utilizado o software Recon, produto de um conve nio entre a Petrobras e a PUC-Rio, que utiliza os princi pios da restaurac a o meca nica atrave s de modelos nume ricos de elementos finitos Santi, 2002 . Todas as demais etapas foram realizadas utilizando o software Petrel Schlumberger . A base de dados contou com as informac o es de sete poc os selecionados na a rea de Iracema e o dado si smico 3D RO276 BS500 MERGE PSDM FASE2 migrado em profundidade. Os dados dos poc os e o dado si smico foram fornecidos pela Age ncia Nacional do Petro leo, Ga s Natural e Biocombusti veis ANP , atrave s do Banco de Dados de Explorac a o e Produc a o BDEP ANP, de acordo com a Resoluc a o ANP n 757, de 23 de novembro de 2018. A a rea estudada e limitada por um reta ngulo de arestas de 22 x 28 km, totalizando 616 km2 Figura 1 . Devido a baixa qualidade do dado si smico, antes de iniciar o mapeamento dos horizontes foi feito um tratamento, com o objetivo de ter um dado mais conti nuo e menos ruidoso. Ale m do dado de amplitude do sinal si smico utilizado, foi construi do o atributo Variance, que identifica descontinuidades no sinal, permitindo a identificac a o de falhas mapea veis na escala si smica Van Bemmel et al., 2000 . A construc a o do arcabouc o tectono estratigra fico envolveu a interpretac a o e correlac a o de perfis dos poc os e o mapeamento si smico de superfi cies estratigra ficas e falhas na a rea de interesse. Os perfis utilizados nesta etapa foram Caracterizac a o de a rea do Pre -sal da Bacia de Santos Figura 3. Fluxograma com as etapas metodolo gicas utilizadas para a realizac a o do presente estudo. 1 Construc a o do arcabouc o estrutural-estratigra fico 2 reconstruc a o estrutural 3 construc a o de mapas de paleobatimetria 4 modelagem de processos estratigra ficos e sedimentolo gicos. os de raios gama e ressona ncia magne tica, para definir os intervalos estratigra ficos, e os perfis so nico e de densidade, para fazer a amarrac a o com o dado si smico. Tendo como base os conceitos de estratigrafia de seque ncias e a correlac a o estratigra fica com a reas ana logas na Bacia de Santos, foi possi vel interpretar tre s marcos estratigra ficos que suportaram o mapeamento si smico no intervalo sag da Formac a o Barra Velha o topo da sec a o rifte um horizonte intermedia rio no intervalo sag e a base do sal. Foram assim definidos dois intervalos de interesse denominados como sag inferior e sag superior. Tendo em vista a etapa de reconstruc a o estrutural, tambe m foi necessa rio mapear o fundo do mar e o topo do sal na a rea de interesse. Ale m dos horizontes estratigra ficos mencionados, foram mapeadas 74 falhas normais sinte ticas e antite ticas. A reconstruc a o estrutural consiste na reconstituic a o da geometria original dos horizontes antes da deformac a o sofrida ao longo do tempo geolo gico. Este processo pode ser realizado a partir de algoritmos geome tricos que simulam determinadas premissas geolo gicas, como por exemplo, a preservac a o da a rea dos blocos deformados em regime distensivos. A escolha da orientac a o das sec o es a serem restauradas e uma importante premissa, devendo ser orientadas paralelamente a direc a o de transporte tecto nico e assumindo-se tambe m que a deformac a o deve ser plana Elliott, 1983 Woodcock e Fischer 1986 . Na etapa de reconstruc a o estrutural da a rea investigada foram selecionadas 14 sec o es perpendiculares e tre s sec o es paralelas a s principais feic o es estruturais mapeadas. As sec o es paralelas a s falhas tiveram como objetivo somente amarrar as demais sec o es. Para realizar a reconstruc a o estrutural foi gerada uma malha de elementos geome tricos triangulares com arestas de 170 m. Apo s a construc a o da malha, foram definidos quatro intervalos estratigra ficos a serem restaurados po s-sal, sal, sag superior e sag inferior , sendo atribui das a cada intervalo, caracteri sticas de porosidade, decaimento da porosidade e densidade Tabela 1 . A primeira etapa envolveu a descompactac a o dos intervalos superiores aos intervalos de interesse sag inferior e sag superior , que no software RECON utiliza uma relac a o exponencial de decaimento da porosidade com a profundidade, realizando posteriormente a restaurac a o dos blocos de falhas. Para restaurar os blocos de falhas estes sa o separados em mo dulo e posteriormente utilizando a ferramenta Move sobre Falhas , que atrave s da translac a o e do cisalhamento puro, retorna o intervalo de interesse a geometria pre -deformac a o a que foi submetido Santi, 2002 . Apo s a etapa de reconstruc a o estrutural ser finalizada, foram construi dos os mapas de paleobatimetria das superfi cies restauradas referentes a s bases dos intervalos sag inferior e sag superior. Diversos algoritmos foram testados para a interpolac a o dos dados das sec o es restauradas, sendo selecionada, como o de melhor resultado, a simulac a o gaussiana sequencial, me todo estoca stico de interpolac a o - 56 - Geol. USP, Se r. cient., Sa o Paulo, v. 24, n. 1, p. 51-72, Marc o 2024 Carvalho, R. K. et al. baseado em krigagem. Foi gerado um variograma com alcance ma ximo de 5.000 m e mi nimo de 3.000 m, utilizando como direc a o de anisotropia a orientac a o geral do alto de Iracema N30W . Os horizontes restaurados foram convertidos em um mapa de paleobatimetria atrave s de uma equac a o construi da para transformar a superfi cie restaurada na superfi cie batime trica do lago no momento da deposic a o, respeitando os dados de perfis de porosidade dos poc os e utilizando dados bibliogra ficos sobre a caracterizac a o estratigra fica e faciolo gica dos reservato rios carbona ticos da sec a o Pre -sal da Bacia de Santos Faria et al., 2017 Artaga o, 2018 e de ana logos recentes Cohen et al., 1997 . Esta metodologia modifica o trabalho de Faria et al. 2017 onde ela propo e a construc a o da paleobatimetria do lago a partir dos horizontes restaurados, pore m em seu trabalho ela normaliza os valores da superfi cie restaurada para um range de profundidade do lago. Para demonstrar a aplicabilidade do produto final da construc a o dos mapas paleobatime tricos, foi realizaTabela 1. Valores atribui dos aos para metros porosidade, decaimento da porosidade e densidade para os intervalos definidos para a restaurac a o estrutural. Intervalos Para metros Po s-sal Sal Sag superior Sag inferior Porosidade 0,48 0 0,42 0,45 Decaimento da porosidade 1 km 0,46 - 0,44 0,45 Densidade g cm3 2,70 2,16 2,73 2,72 carbona ticas sera restrito ao retrabalhamento das fa cies formadas in situ na pro pria estrutura. Para controlar a subside ncia foi construi do um mapa de iso pacas do intervalo sag superior. A espessura do intervalo foi dividida pelo tempo estimado para a deposic a o deste intervalo, sendo considerado um peri odo de 2 Ma, entre 115 e 113 Ma, resultando em um mapa de subside ncia. O condicionamento do ni vel de variac a o do lago durante a simulac a o, foi feito atrave s da construc a o de uma curva de alta freque ncia a partir dos dados dos perfis de raios gama e ressona ncia magne tica, sendo tambe m utilizados dados bibliogra ficos produzidos em a reas ana logas Faria et al., 2017 Artaga o, 2018 . Para o controle do suprimento sedimentar foram construi das curvas de produtividade para as fa cies carbona ticas in situ em func a o da batimetria, de acordo com dados bibliogra ficos sobre a caracterizac a o estratigra fica e faciolo gica dos reservato rios carbona ticos da sec a o Pre -sal da Bacia de Santos Faria et al., 2017 Artaga o, 2018 e de ana logos recentes Cohen et al., 1997 . A deposic a o de fa cies carbona ticas retrabalhadas foi simulada atrave s de eventos autoci clicos relacionados a ondas, causando erosa o das fa cies precipitadas in situ. As ondas foram consideradas como tendo origem na parte leste e nordeste do Alto de Iracema, de acordo com dados obtidos por Minzoni et al. 2021 em uma regia o ao norte da a rea de Iracema. RESULTADOS Interpretac a o estratigra fica dos poc os da uma modelagem de processos, especificamente, neste caso, uma modelagem nume rica sedimentolo gica-estatigra fica, que e uma ferramenta u til para a ana lise de sistemas carbona ticos, permitindo reproduzir cena rios da arquitetura interna da plataforma carbona tica em resposta a s variac o es da deposic a o, erosa o, retrabalhamento dos sedimentos e variac a o do ni vel de base, sendo estes para metros fortemente controlados pela batimetria inicial Bosence et al., 1994 . A modelagem de processos foi realizada para o intervalo sag superior, utilizando como dado de entrada duas superfi cies paleobatime tricas, para comparac a o dos resultados a que foi construi da a partir da restaurac a o do horizonte intermedia rio do intervalo sag e uma superfi cie construi da a partir do horizonte originalmente interpretado na si smica. Neste tipo de modelagem, tre s controles estratigra ficos principais sa o considerados o espac o de acomodac a o, que varia em func a o da subside ncia e da variac a o do ni vel do lago o suprimento sedimentar, que para as fa cies carbona ticas e controlado pela paleobatimetria e taxa de acumulac a o dos carbonatos e o transporte, que no caso das fa cies A sec a o sag da Formac a o Barra Velha foi dividida em dois intervalos sag inferior e sag superior a partir da identificac a o nos poc os B e F de um contato entre uma zona argilosa, abaixo, e o reservato rio carbona tico Figura 4 . Este contato e denominado no presente estudo como superfi cie BVE-INT. O intervalo sag inferior estende-se desde o topo da sec a o rifte da Formac a o Barra Velha BVE-INF que corresponde a DIA Discorda ncia Intra-Alagoas , ate a superfi cie BVE-INT. O intervalo sag superior e delimitado na base pela superfi cie BVE-INT e, no topo, pela superfi cie aqui denominada BVE-SUP, que e coincidente com o topo do reservato rio e base do sal. A zona argilosa do intervalo inferior e caracterizada no perfil de ressona ncia magne tica por leituras com alta porosidade total e baixa porosidade de fluido livre. O intervalo sag inferior tambe m apresenta leituras de raios gama mais elevadas do que o intervalo sag superior. No intervalo sag superior, nenhum poc o na a rea de estudo amostrou as fa cies argilosas identificadas no sag inferior. Aplicando-se os conceitos de estratigrafia de seque ncias, o intervalo sag inferior corresponde a dois ciclos de me dia freque ncia de transgressa o e regressa o do lago completo e uma fase final de transgressa o Figura 4 . Os topos dos intervalos de transgressa o sa o caracterizados pe- Geol. USP, Se r. cient., Sa o Paulo, v. 24, n. 1, p. 51-72, Marc o 2024 - 57 - Caracterizac a o de a rea do Pre -sal da Bacia de Santos los altos valores registrados no perfil de raios gama, que podem ser correlacionados a ocorre ncia de esferulitos e laminitos lisos. O intervalo sag superior corresponde a uma fase de regressa o na base, seguida de um ciclo completo de transgressa o e regressa o do lago Figura 4 . O topo da fase regressiva final culmina com a deposic a o de laminitos crenulados com feic o es de exposic a o, caracterizados em perfil pelo aumento dos raios gama no topo do reservato rio. Estes ciclos possuem boa correlac a o nos poc os analisados na a rea de estudo. Interpretac a o do arcabouc o si smico-estratigra fico e si smico-estrutural Em uma ana lise geral, o intervalo de interesse na a rea de estudo configura um alto estrutural Figura 5 alongado na direc a o predominante NNW-SSE Figura 6 . A estrutura e caracterizada como um horst assime trico, composto por falhas normais desenvolvidas na fase rifte e reativadas durante a fase sag. O horizonte BVE-INF e caracterizado na si smica por um refletor de forte impeda ncia positiva, Figura 5 . Na a rea mapeada, este horizonte possui cotas variando entre -6340 m e -4955 m Figura 6 . A forma de um horst assime trico e evidente no mapa de contorno estrutural desta superfi cie estratigra fica, com um alto bem caracterizado na porc a o pro xima aos poc os A, G, D e E. A oeste deste alto ha um depocentro, com um desni vel topogra fico aproximado de 200 m e, na porc a o leste da estrutura, o depocentro principal esta mais afastado da estrutura do alto do embasamento econo mico Formac a o Camboriu , estando condicionada por uma fami lia de falhas sinte ticas com mergulho para leste. Outros altos locais de menor expressa o sa o observados como, por exemplo, pro ximo ao poc o C. O horizonte BVE-INT e bem caracterizado na si smica por um refletor de forte impeda ncia negativa Figura 5 . Este horizonte apresenta uma variac a o de cotas entre -5933 e -4847 m Figura 6 , sendo observada no mapa de contorno estrutural a existe ncia de um alto secunda rio importante na regia o dos poc os B e F, ale m do alto principal entre os poc os E e C. A identificac a o do horizonte BVE-SUP no mapeamento si smico foi realizada indiretamente, a partir de um refletor de forte impeda ncia positiva que assinala a passagem de um intervalo de anidrita para um intervalo de halita, na base da Formac a o Ariri, logo acima dos carbonatos da Formac a o Barra Velha Figura 4 . Este intervalo de anidrita e caracterizado em todos os poc os da a rea de interesse, com espessura me dia de 10 m. O horizonte BVE-SUP foi representado na interpretac a o si smica apo s a espessura do intervalo de anidrita ser descontada Figura 5 . Este horizonte apresenta uma variac a o de cota entre -5684 e -4710 m Figura 6 . O mapa de contorno estrutural deste horizonte mostra um amplo alto estrutural, que esta associado a uma maior deposic a o de carbonatos. O intervalo inferior da sec a o sag apresenta espessuras variando entre 40 e 486 m, com espessura me dia de190 m. Figura 4. Correlac a o de poc os com a interpretac a o da Estratigrafia de Alta Resoluc a o seque ncias T-R no intervalo de interesse. - 58 - Geol. USP, Se r. cient., Sa o Paulo, v. 24, n. 1, p. 51-72, Marc o 2024 Carvalho, R. K. et al. Figura 5. Sec a o si smica Sec a o 1 ver localizac a o na Figura 6 com a interpretac a o dos horizontes estratigra ficos e falhas. Ale m dos horizontes utilizados no trabalho, e inclui da a interpretac a o dos horizontes do topo da Formac a o Itapema e topo da Formac a o Camboriu . As falhas apresentam mergulho para leste e oeste, delimitando um Horst central. O poli gono vermelho na sec a o si smica interpretada corresponde ao intervalo destacado no perfil do poc o A, assinalando as fa cies lamosas da Formac a o Itapema. Legenda dos perfis na Figura 4. Figura 6. Mapas de contorno estrutural das superfi cies BVE-INF, BVE-INT e BVE-SUP, com a localizac a o dos poc os A G, utilizados para amarrac a o estratigra fica, e da sec a o si smica 1 apresentada na Figura 5 . As escalas de cores indicam a profundidade em metros . Geol. USP, Se r. cient., Sa o Paulo, v. 24, n. 1, p. 51-72, Marc o 2024 - 59 - Caracterizac a o de a rea do Pre -sal da Bacia de Santos O intervalo superior possui espessuras entre 35 e 335 m, com espessura me dia de 146 m. De acordo com a ana lise si smico-estratigra fica e si smico-estrutural realizada, a configurac a o do Horst ja estava implantada pre -horizonte BVE-INT. Com base na interpretac a o dos dados do poc o A, pode ser identificada a presenc a de depo sitos de baixa energia no intervalo rifte inferior Fm. Itapema , caracterizados em perfil por rochas com alto valor em raios gama e baixa porosidade efetiva registrada no perfil ressona ncia magne tica. Este intervalo tambe m apresenta sismofa cies plano-paralelas na sec a o si smica Figura 5 , sugerindo, em conjunto com a interpretac a o dos dados do poc o A, ter sido depositado em um baixo estrutural. No intervalo rifte da Fm. Barra Velha Rifte BVE , delimitado no topo pelo horizonte BVE-INF, constata-se a modificac a o da condic a o de porosidade do poc o, com o aumento da porosidade e a deposic a o de carbonatos porosos Figura 5 . Foram mapeadas 74 falhas na a rea de estudo. As falhas apresentam rejeito normal e sa o sinte ticas e antite ticas a s estruturas que definem o horst principal. No geral apresentam uma geometria plana, podendo apresentar alguma tortuosidade Figura 5 . Analisando as espessuras dos blocos baixos, tanto em direc a o a leste como oeste, em relac a o ao horst onde esta localizado o poc o A nota-se o aumento de espessura dos intervalos inferior e superior do sag, indicando que estas falhas estavam ativas durante a deposic a o destes intervalos. Na avaliac a o estati stica das falhas interpretadas na si smica, o cara ter bimodal do azimute do mergulho dip direction e evidente Figura 7 , com dois picos de azimute, variando entre 060o e 080o e entre 240o e 260o. Estes azimutes de mergulho corroboram a direc a o principal NNW da estrutura observada nos mapas de contorno estrutural. Com relac a o aos a ngulos de mergulho, pode-se observar que variam Figura 7. Azimute do mergulho A e a ngulo de mergulho B das falhas mapeadas na a rea de estudo. desde 24o a 84o Figura 7 , com predomi nio entre 52o e 72o, com valores me dios em torno de 58o e desvio padra o de 10o. Analisando-se em detalhe as falhas interpretadas na a rea de estudo, nota-se uma variac a o da direc a o do plano de falha de NNE-SSW a NNW-SSE Figuras 8 e 9 . Na regia o sul observa-se a direc a o das falhas NNE-SSW, conforme se desloca para a regia o central da a rea de estudo as falhas modificam sua direc a o para N-S e, por fim, no norte da a rea de estudo, ha um predomi nio da direc a o NNW-SSE. Analisando-se os azimutes de mergulho em mapa, os dois grupos principais de azimutes vistos no histograma se agrupam em posic o es geogra ficas diferentes da a rea de estudo o grupo com azimute entre 060o e 080o mostra uma concentrac a o maior na borda leste da estrutura e o grupo com azimute entre 240o e 260o na borda oeste, dando forma ao horst da a rea de estudo Figuras 8 e 10 . As principais falhas mapeadas no trabalho e o sentido de mergulho das mesmas esta o apresentadas na Figura 10, configurando um alto estrutural propi cio a deposic a o de carbonatos com boas caracteri sticas permoporosas durante o intervalo de deposic a o sag da bacia. Nota-se um padra o diferente da continuidade das falhas que delimitam o alto de Iracema por exemplo, as falhas F3 e F4 com uma maior extensa o destas, em comparac a o a falhas presentes na porc a o interna da estrutura e de direc a o N-S e NNW-SSE. Figura 8. A Representac a o das principais direc o es de falhas NNE-SSW, N-S e NNW-SSE B Mapa com o azimute me dio do mergulho das falhas mapeadas. - 60 - Geol. USP, Se r. cient., Sa o Paulo, v. 24, n. 1, p. 51-72, Marc o 2024 Carvalho, R. K. et al. Figura 9. Plot de estereogramas dos principais conjuntos de falhas mapeadas NNE-SSW, N-S e NNW-SSE . Nas falhas de direc a o NNW-SSE, pro ximos ao poc o B, existe um padra o en echelon, indicando algum componente direcional. Analisando o mapa de falhas Figura 10 , a evide ncia de algum movimento obli quo se da devido a grande continuidade das falhas que delimitam a estrutura, sendo que as falhas com segmentos mais curtos se encontram na parte interna do horst, delimitado por essas falhas conti nuas que encurvam de NNE-SSW, para N-S, e finalmente para NNW-SSE. A direc a o obli qua das falhas internas com segmentos mais curtos em relac a o a s extensas falhas da borda da estrutura, sugere uma componente obli qua destral leve. A feic a o do horst de Iracema, delimitada pelas falhas F3 e F4 Figura 10 , segundo a classificac a o de zonas de acomodac a o, corresponderia a Fami lia 2, com meio-gra bens opostos, com superposic a o ISAZ de acordo com Morley et al. 1990 , a zona de transfere ncia seria do tipo conjugada, divergente, com superposic a o. RECONSTRUC A O ESTRUTURAL Figura 10. Principais falhas mapeadas sobre o mapa de contorno estrutural do horizonte BVE-SUP. As falhas F1 a F4 apresentadas no mapa sera o destacadas na Figura 12. Para realizar a reconstruc a o estrutural, foram selecionadas 14 sec o es perpendiculares a direc a o NNW-SSE, que e a direc a o predominante das falhas mapeadas na a rea de estudo, conforme constatado nos histogramas da Figura 9. Essa escolha segue a premissa de que as sec o es a serem restauradas devem ser paralelas ao transporte tecto nico registrado na a rea de estudo. Ale m disso, foram selecionadas tre s sec o es paralelas a s feic o es estruturais com o objetivo de amarrar as sec o es restauradas previamente e facilitar a construc a o dos mapas Figura 11 . Para obter os resultados da reconstruc a o estrutural, as seguintes etapas foram realizadas nas 17 sec o es selecionadas primeiro, foi feita a descompactac a o dos intervalos po s-sal e sal, seguida pela construc a o dos mo dulos que separam Figura 11. A Distribuic a o das sec o es restauradas sobre o mapade contorno estrutural do horizonte BVE-SUP. A escala de cores indica a profundidade em metros B Visualizac a o 3D das sec o es indicadas em A linhas vermelhas , com a interpretac a o dos intervalos estratigra ficos. Geol. USP, Se r. cient., Sa o Paulo, v. 24, n. 1, p. 51-72, Marc o 2024 - 61 - Caracterizac a o de a rea do Pre -sal da Bacia de Santos os blocos falhados Figura 12 .Em seguida, os rejeitos das falhas no topo do reservato rio BVE-SUP foram restaurados de forma a obter uma superfi cie com a geometria pre -deformac a o. Por fim, apo s a restaurac a o dos rejeitos das falhas, foi realizada a descompactac a o do intervalo sag superior. Esse procedimento foi repetido para o horizonte BVE-INT, no qual os rejeitos foram restaurados e, posteriormente, o intervalo sag inferior foi descompactado. Apo s a descompactac a o dos intervalos po s-sal e sal das sec o es analisadas no alto estrutural de Iracema Figura 11 , foi removida a deformac a o volume trica da sec a o Pre -sal, com o aumento da espessura do intervalo sag variando entre 35 e 45 devido a retirada do soterramento. Este resultado e exemplificado pela restaurac a o da sec a o 1 Figura 12 . Na Sec a o1, que atravessa a parte central da a rea de Iracema, e evidente a reativac a o de falhas durante a fase sag e talvez ate mesmo durante a fase de deposic a o do sal, com rejeitos no horizonte BVE-SUP, topo do intervalo sag superior, chegando a 119 m na falha F1 a leste do mo dulo 6 Figura 12 . Este mo dulo 6 foi utilizado como refere ncia para a restaurac a o estrutural, sendo todos os demais mo dulos movimentados em relac a o a ele. Outras falhas tambe m apresentam rejeito no horizonte BVE-SUP, e esta o destacadas na Figura 12, com os rejeitos na ordem de dezenas de metros. As falhas F3 e F4, que limitam a regia o do alto de Iracema, possuem rejeito de 43 e 26 m, respectivamente. As falhas F1 e F2 limitam a parte mais alta da estrutura, com a falha F2 apresentando um rejeito de 31 m. As outras falhas presentes na sec a o, apesar de na o apresentarem rejeito aparente no topo do horizonte BVE-SUP, exibem variac o es da espessura do intervalo sag superior que podem ser explicadas pela movimentac a o tecto nica durante a deposic a o dos carbonatos. A espessura do intervalo sag aumenta do bloco alto mo dulos 6 e 7 para os blocos baixos, tanto a leste como a oeste, ficando bem mais evidente nos blocos das extremidades da sec a o mo dulos 1, 2, 10 e 11 . Este padra o tambe m e uma indicac a o da reativac a o das falhas rifte durante a deposic a o dos intervalos inferior e superior na fase sag. Figuras 13 e 14 . Ao analisar as espessuras desses intervalos, e possi vel identificar um aumento mais expressivo na espessura do intervalo inferior. Em alguns casos, e observado um espessamento do Figura 12. Descompactac a o dos intervalos po s-sal e sal. Sec a o 1 original interpretada no dado si smico A , com a descompactac a o do intervalo po s-sal B e com a descompactac a o do intervalo sal C . As falhas destacadas em vermelho apresentam rejeito no horizonte BVE-SUP topo da Formac a o Barra Velha . Os nu meros de 1 a 11 identificam os mo dulos utilizados na restaurac a o. - 62 - Geol. USP, Se r. cient., Sa o Paulo, v. 24, n. 1, p. 51-72, Marc o 2024 Carvalho, R. K. et al. Figura 13. Descompactac a o dos intervalos sag superior e inferior. A Sec a o 1 apo s a descompactac a o do sal, tambe m apresentada na Figura 12C B Restaurac a o do horizonte BVE-SUP, com a remoc a o dos rejeitos das falhas que afetam esta superficie C Sec a o 1 com o intervalo sag superior descompactado, com o horizonte BVE-INT no momento final da deposic a o do intervalo sag inferior D Restaurac a o do horizonte BVE-INT, com a remoc a o dos rejeitos das falhas que afetam esta superficie E Descompactac a o do intervalo sag inferior, sendo obtida a superficie BVE-INF no inicio da deposic a o dos carbonatos do intervalo sag. As falhas destacadas em vermelho apresentam rejeito no horizonte BVE-INT. Os nu meros de 1 a 11 identificam os mo dulos utilizados na restaurac a o. intervalo inferior em direc a o as falhas, como exemplificado no mo dulo 10 da Figura 14. Essa evide ncia sugere uma atividade mais intensa das falhas durante o intervalo inferior do intervalo sag. Apo s a restaurac a o estrutural do horizonte BVE-SUP Figura 13B e descompactac a o do intervalo sag superior, foi obtida a superfi cie BVE-INT no momento final da deposic a o do intervalo sag inferior Figura 13C . A reativac a o de falhas observada no topo do intervalo sag superior tambe m e verificada no horizonte BVE-INT, assim como o aumento da espessura do intervalo sag inferior em direc a o aos blocos baixos, corroborando a existe ncia tambe m de uma tecto nica sin-deposicional. Apo s a restaurac a o estrutural do horizonte BVE-INT Figura 13D e descompactac a o do intervalo sag inferior foi obtida a superfi cie que serviu como base para a deposi- c a o dos carbonatos do intervalo sag inferior Figura 13E . Fica evidente que o alto estrutural ja estava configurado desde o final da fase rifte e as falhas apresentam um maior rejeito quando comparado a fase sag. Para o controle da qualidade do resultado da restaurac a o, um indicativo de que a sec a o esta balanceada, e a ause ncia de deformac a o nos limites da sec a o, com os limites laterais mantendo a verticalidade, e a ause ncia de inversa o dos rejeitos das falhas nos intervalos mais antigos, apo s a restaurac a o dos intervalos mais novos. Os mapas de contorno estrutural dos horizontes BVE-INF e BVE-INT construi dos a partir da malha de sec o es restauradas Figura 15 corroboram com a interpretac a o si smica de um alto estrutural principal entre os poc os A e E no final da fase rifte, com altos locais como, por exemplo, Geol. USP, Se r. cient., Sa o Paulo, v. 24, n. 1, p. 51-72, Marc o 2024 - 63 - Caracterizac a o de a rea do Pre -sal da Bacia de Santos a norte do poc o F Figura 15A . O mapa de contorno estrutural do horizonte BVE-INT restaurado mostra a extensa o do alto estrutural principal em direc a o ao poc o C, com um alto secunda rio na regia o dos poc os B e F. PALEOBATIMETRIA Figura 14. Zoom nos mo dulos 7 a 11 da Sec a o 1 para demonstrar que a espessura do intervalo sag aumenta do bloco alto mo dulo 7 para os blocos do baixo em direc a o ao oeste, ficando bem mais evidente nos mo dulos 10 e 11. As equac o es utilizadas para a conversa o da profundidade dos mapas de contorno estrutural dos horizontes BVE-INF e BVE-INT restaurados em valores batime tricos do lago no ini cio da deposic a o dos intervalos sag inferior e superior esta o enunciadas abaixo Equac o es 1 e 2, respectivamen- Escala de cores da legenda indicam a profundidade em metros. Figura 15. A Mapa de contorno estrutural do horizonte BVE-INF restaurado B Mapa de contorno estrutural do horizonte BVE-INT restaurado. Figura 16. Equac a o usada para estimar a paleobatimetria do intervalo sag superior. As linhas coloridas correspondem a expectativa de cota de ocorre ncia das fa cies, com base em analogos recentes Cohen et al., 1997 e do Pre -sal Faria et al., 2017 Artaga o, 2018 . Destaca-se a cota paleobatime trica de 45 m, que marca a transic a o das fa cies de um ambiente de alta energia GST Grainstones ETR Arboresce ncia Calci tica Fascicular , acima desta cota, para as fa cies de menor energia ESF Esferulitos LMT Laminitos Lisos . A fa cies Laminitos Crenulados LMT-Cr esta associada a profundidades ainda mais rasas com eventual exposic a o. - 64 - Geol. USP, Se r. cient., Sa o Paulo, v. 24, n. 1, p. 51-72, Marc o 2024 Carvalho, R. K. et al. Escala de cores indicam a profundidade em metros. Figura 17. A Mapa de paleobatimetria do horizonte BVE-INF, representando a profundidade do lago no inicio da deposic a o do intervalo sag inferior B Mapa de paleobatimetria do horizonte BVE-INT, representando a profundidade do lago no inicio da deposic a o do intervalo sag superior. Destaca-se a cota paleobatimetrica de 45 m, que marca a transic a o das fa cies de alta energia arboresce ncia calci tica fascicular e grainstones para as fa cies de baixa energia esferulitos e laminitos com argila magnesiana . te . As inclinac o es dessas retas foram determinadas atrave s do ajuste dos resultados das paleobatimetrias a s expectativas das fa cies reconhecidas nos poc os. Esse ajuste levou em considerac a o a presenc a de fa cies carbona ticas ou argilosas nos perfis de ressona ncia magne tica. Dessa forma, nos mapas gerados, os poc os onde na o foram identificadas fa cies com argila magnesiana deveriam estar posicionados acima da cota de 45m. y -0,478941 x-2144,28 1 para a construc a o do mapa paleobatime trico do intervalo sag inferior y -0,30844 x-1341,85 2 para a construc a o do mapa paleobatime trico do intervalo sag superior, demonstrada na Figura 16 A distribuic a o batime trica considerada para as fa cies carbona ticas mostra uma transic a o entre as fa cies de alta energia grainstones e arboresce ncia calci tica fascicular e as fa cies de baixa energia esferulitos e laminitos com argila magnesiana aproximadamente na cota batime trica de 45 m LMT-Cr Laminitos crenulados ETR Arboresce ncia Calci tica Fascicular ESF Esferulitos LMT Laminitos Lisos. Figura 18. A Mapa de subside ncia do intervalo sag superior B Variac a o do ni vel do lago utilizada na simulac a o de processos. A curva de variac a o do ni vel do lago e condicionada pela estratigrafia de me dia e alta freque ncia definida nos poc os a partir da correlac a o com a reas ana logas C Produtividade dos carbonatos in situ utilizada nos cena rios de modelagem de processos. A batimetria em depositos carbona ticos tem um forte controle na produtividade dos sedimentos, sendo utilizada para controlar a deposic a o das fa cies na modelagem de processo. Geol. USP, Se r. cient., Sa o Paulo, v. 24, n. 1, p. 51-72, Marc o 2024 - 65 - Caracterizac a o de a rea do Pre -sal da Bacia de Santos Figura 19. Resultados da modelagem de processos estratigra ficos-sedimentolo gicos do intervalo sag superior utilizando, como dado de entrada para os modelos, a superfi cie restaurada do horizonte BVE-INT A e a superfi cie si smica BVE-INT B . Sa o destacados cinco momentos dos modelos simulados, correlacionados aos ciclos de variac a o de alta freque ncia do nivel do lago indicados pelas letras de a e . Figura 16 . Os laminitos crenulados esta o associadas a profundidades ainda mais rasas e podendo ocorrer exposic a o. O mapa de paleobatimetria do intervalo sag inferior Figura 17A apresenta valores de profundidade variando entre 5 e 150 m. Apenas porc o es relacionadas ao alto principal, onde esta o localizados os poc os A e D, e altos estruturais locais, como a regia o do poc o C, esta o associadas a cotas acima de 45 m de profundidade. A regia o onde se localizam os poc os B e F esta abaixo da cota paleobatime trica de 45 m, configurando um ambiente de baixa energia, o que esta de acordo com a interpretac a o da presenc a de argila no intervalo sag inferior nos perfis de porosidade dos poc os. O mapa de paleobatimetria do intervalo sag superior Figura 17B tambe m apresenta profundidade variando entre 5 e 150 m, pore m neste mapa observa-se que todos os poc os analisados esta o localizados acima da cota paleobatime trica de 45 m. Este ambiente mais raso e o que possibilita o desenvolvimento de fa cies carbona ticas com boas condic o es porosas, o que e confirmado pelos perfis dos poc os analisados no presente estudo, na o sendo identificada a presenc a de argila magnesiana no intervalo sag superior. A modelagem de processos sedimentolo gicos-estratigra ficos realizada no intervalo sag superior peri odo entre 115 Ma e 113 Ma exemplifica a aplicac a o dos mapas paleobatime tricos para a interpretac a o paleogeogra fica. Sera o apresentados a seguir os resultados das duas simulac o es realizadas, utilizando a superfi cie restaurada do horizonte BVE-INT e a superfi cie si smica original, demonstrando a importa ncia da restaurac a o estrutural. Antes de apresentar as simulac o es realizadas, e necessa rio detalhar as interpretac o es de alguns dos para metros que controlaram a modelagem de processos. O mapa de subside ncia construi do a partir do mapa de iso pacas do intervalo sag superior Figura 18A apontou valores entre 0,01 e 0,17 mm a, com valor me dio de 0,07 mm a. Com relac a o a variac a o de mais alta freque ncia do ni vel do lago adotada na simulac a o, o intervalo de transgressa o de me dia freque ncia do sag superior foi subdividido em um ciclo completo de afogamento e raseamento na base, terminando com mais uma fase de afogamento no topo Figura 18B . O intervalo de raseamento de me dia freque ncia do topo foi detalhado em uma fase de raseamento na base e um ciclo completo de afogamento e raseamento no topo Figura 18B . De acordo com as curvas de produtividade para as fa cies carbona ticas in situ em func a o da batimetria Figura 18C , foram reconhecidas as seguintes faixas ideais para a deposic a o laminitos crenulados entre 0 e 5 m arboresce ncia calci tica fascicular entre 6 e 40 m esferulitos entre 40 e 50 m laminitos lisos maior do que 50 m. Os resultados obtidos na modelagem de processos utilizando a superfi cie BVE-INT restaurada Figura - 66 - Geol. USP, Se r. cient., Sa o Paulo, v. 24, n. 1, p. 51-72, Marc o 2024 MODELAGEM DE PROCESSOS GEOLO GICOS Carvalho, R. K. et al. 19A , indicam que inicialmente a plataforma carbona tica estava mais afogada devido ao final da fase transgressiva do intervalo sag inferior, ocorrendo a deposic a o de fa cies de menor energia esferulitos em grande parte do alto da estrutura de Iracema Figura 19Aa , o que e corroborado pela presenc a de piores porosidades na base do intervalo sag superior Figura 4 . No final da primeira fase de raseamento de alta freque ncia Figura 18B , verifica-se o aumento da quantidade dos carbonatos arborescentes, que ocupam a a rea do alto estrutural Figura 19Ab . No momento de maior afogamento do intervalo sag superior 114 Ma , ocorre a expansa o da deposic a o de fa cies esferulitos, indicando novamente um peri odo de menor energia Figura 19Ac . Na fase de raseamento de alta frequ e ncia seguinte e registrada a ocorre ncia de uma maior proporc a o de fa cies de arboresce ncia calci tica depositada no alto da estrutura, inclusive com exposic a o, e a presenc a de uma proporc a o de depo sitos carbona ticos retrabalhados na parte leste da estrutura Figura 19Ad . A fase final de raseamento do intervalo sag superior e representada pela maior deposic a o dos laminitos crenulados Figura 19Ae , que colmatam a estrutura e esta o assinalados nos perfis pelos altos valores de raios gama no topo do reservato rio Figura 4 . Na simulac a o de processos utilizando a superfi cie BVE-INT si smica original Figura 19B , a plataforma carbona tica apresenta-se mais estreita em comparac a o com a simulac a o anterior, com menor ocorre ncia de fa cies carbona ticas depositadas em profundidades mais rasas. Neste cena rio esta sendo indicada a deposic a o de fa cies com argila magnesiana nas regio es dos poc os B e F durante os peri odos de subida do ni vel do lago Figuras 19Ba e 19Bc , o que de fato na o foi observado nos poc os. Durante os peri odos de retrac a o do lago, observa-se uma menor expansa o a real da plataforma carbona tica, que esta sendo limitada pela paleobatimetria mais profunda nos flancos da estrutura de Iracema Figuras 19Bb, 19Bd e 19Be , ocorrendo a deposic a o de fa cies carbona ticas in situ rasas e retrabalhadas apenas mais pro ximo ao alto principal de Iracema. DISCUSSA O A a rea de Iracema configura um alto estrutural que foi propi cio a deposic a o de fa cies carbona ticas no Aptiano, entre as idades de 117 e 113 Ma. No entanto, a sua histo ria inicial durante a fase rifte inferior Formac a o Itapema , relacionada a depo sitos de baixa energia, indica que o horst ainda na o estava estruturado. O aumento da porosidade a partir do intervalo rifte da Formac a o Barra Velha, delimitado no topo pelo horizonte BVE-INF, marca a alterac a o das condic o es estruturais e, por conseque ncia, deposicionais. Esta mudanc a e correlacionada neste estudo a atuac a o da zona de transfere ncia Iracema, promovendo a modificac a o das condic o es estruturais. A estrutura de Iracema, em uma posic a o relativa mais alta durante a deposic a o da fase sag, possibilitou a deposic a o de fa cies carbona ticas com boas caracteri sticas permoporosas. A sec a o sag inferior e correlacionada a uma fase de expansa o do lago, hipo tese reforc ada pela grande deposic a o de fa cies argilosas nos baixos relativos, que foram amostradas nos poc os B e F. Wright e Tosca 2016 consideraram que os argilominerais magnesianos se preservam preferencialmente em ambiente sublitora neo, com la mina d a gua intermedia ria e abaixo do ni vel das ondas. A maior atividade tecto nica durante a deposic a o do intervalo inferior desempenha um papel significativo para o aumento do espac o de acomodac a o e das batimetrias. Esse aumento contribui para criar condic o es favora veis a deposic a o das argilas magnesianas no bloco baixo da falha F1, na regia o dos poc os B e F. Na sec a o sag supe- Figura 20. A Distribuic a o das fa cies com base na modelagem de processos estratigra fica-sedimentolo gica utilizando o mapa de contorno estrutural do horizonte BVE-INT restaurado B Distribuic a o das fa cies com base na modelagem de processos utilizando o mapa de contorno estrutural do horizonte si smico BVE-INT C Feic a o de mound observada na si smica, indicando que na regia o assinalada pela seta vermelha ainda sa o observadas fa cies de alta energia, como previsto no modelo da superficie restaurada. Geol. USP, Se r. cient., Sa o Paulo, v. 24, n. 1, p. 51-72, Marc o 2024 - 67 - Caracterizac a o de a rea do Pre -sal da Bacia de Santos rior na o foi amostrado nenhum poc o com fa cies argilosas, indicando uma fase de retrac a o do lago, com depo sitos em um ambiente litora neo, com maior concentrac a o de i ons e deposic a o de rochas carbona ticas, hipo tese tambe m sugerida pela ocorre ncia de laminitos com feic a o de exposic a o no topo do reservato rio, que foram identificados e descritos por Faria et al. 2017 . Ale m das mudanc as das condic o es deposicionais, outra evide ncia da atuac a o da zona de transfere ncia de Iracema e a orientac a o da estrutura e das falhas mapeadas. As principais falhas que originaram a Bacia de Santos no Eocreta ceo nuclearam-se ao longo de estruturas preexistentes, herdando a direc a o NE-SW do embasamento. A maior parte da estrutura conhecida como Alto Externo da Bacia de Santos Gomes et al., 2008, 2012 , onde esta localizada a a rea do presente estudo, apresenta esta orientac a o. A presenc a da zona de transfere ncia de Iracema, de direc a o NW-SE, obli qua a orientac a o NE-SW dominante na bacia, combinac a o que resulta na estrutura do S de Santos Magnavita et al., 2010 , influenciou na mudanc a da direc a o para NNW-SSE que predomina na a rea de Iracema. Esta mudanc a e gradual e modifica a estrutura a medida que se aproxima da zona de transfere ncia a sul da a rea ainda se observam falhas na direc a o NE-SW, que se modificam para NNW-SSE no norte da a rea de Iracema. As falhas normais interpretadas na a rea de Iracema possuem rejeito nos intervalos inferior e superior da sec a o sag, algumas apresentando rejeito ate mesmo na base do sal. A reativac a o de falhas que se formaram durante a fase rifte da bacia, e atuaram sin-deposicionalmente durante a fase sag, sugere que na a rea de estudo na o ocorreu uma quiesce ncia tecto nica, como proposto por Moreira et al. 2007 . Outros autores ja descreveram esta reativac a o de falhas durante a fase sag da bacia, como Karner e Gambo a 2007 e Buckley et al. 2015 . Faria et al. 2017 observaram, em seu estudo, a reativac a o de falhas sin- e po s-deposicionais. Essa reativac a o estaria relacionada a migrac a o do eixo do rifte em direc a o a s porc o es mais distais da bacia ao longo da histo ria de deformac a o da crosta continental. Essa migrac a o pode explicar a ocorre ncia de regio es sem deformac a o ru ptil em posic o es mais pro ximas a margem, enquanto em regio es mais distantes, teri amos um regime de rifte ativo que causaria deformac o es menores em posic o es intermedia rias da bacia. Rigoti 2015 demonstrou o diacronismo do preenchimento sedimentar e da estruturac a o do rifte, representado pela migrac a o lateral da deformac a o que acontece em func a o da focalizac a o dos esforc os deformacionais, com as estruturas mais jovens ocorrendo em direc a o ao oceano ou ao si tio do futuro breakup. A estrutura do Alto Externo, com uma direc a o predominante NE-SW, e considerada como o limite entre o Rifte Interno e Externo, sendo delimitado pela estrutura denominada de lineamento Helmut por Dehler et al. 2016 . Enquanto o Rifte Externo continua em processo de deformac a o durante o aptiano superior, uma das hipo teses para os rejeitos de falhas observados na a rea de Iracema e a reativac a o das falhas do sistema do Rifte Interno durante essa movimentac a o do Rifte Externo. Outra hipo tese considerada neste estudo para a a rea de Iracema e a atuac a o da zona de transfere ncia de Iracema. Acredita-se que essa zona esteja sendo afetada pelo avanc o conti nuo do rifte nas partes mais distais da bacia Rifte Externo e Bloco Resistente demonstrados por Rigoti, 2015 , o que resulta no deslocamento das falhas pre -existentes da fase rifte durante a deposic a o dos sedimentos na sec a o sag na a rea de Iracema. Essa hipo tese considera a movimentac a o das falhas como resultado da dina mica complexa entre o Rifte Externo e a zona de transfere ncia de Iracema. Uma terceira hipo tese, apresentada por Adriano et al. 2022 , esta relacionada a uma terceira fase rifte associada a s falhas de direc a o NW-SE presentes na regia o de Iracema. Esta terceira fase rifte e correlata a deposic a o do intervalo superior da Formac a o Barra Velha que correspondem aos intervalos sag Superior e Inferior, abordados neste estudo. A movimentac a o das falhas e o principal motivador para que seja realizada a restaurac a o dos horizontes interpretados na si smica. A restaurac a o estrutural confirmou a interpretac a o si smica da existe ncia do horst de Iracema durante a fase sag. Os horizontes restaurados indicam a ocorre ncia de posic o es relativamente mais altas do que as observadas na si smica em alguns setores do reservato rio, sugerindo a possibilidade de ocorre ncia de depo sitos carbona ticos mais porosos. A restaurac a o estrutural tambe m impacta positivamente na modelagem de processos, modificando a expectativa de ocorre ncia de fa cies reservato rio e na o reservato rio. Como exemplo, a nordeste do poc o B, no modelo utilizando a superfi cie BVE-INT restaurada, existe a expectativa de uma regia o com boas fa cies reservato rios, com intercalac o es de arboresce ncias calci ticas e retrabalhados Figura 20 . Ja na simulac a o utilizando o dado si smico, a regia o a nordeste do poc o B estaria em uma posic a o de baixa energia. Quando e analisado o dado si smico para se avaliar qual modelo e o mais coerente, sa o observadas feic o es como as demonstradas por Minzoni et al. 2021 e classificadas como mounds, compostos por retrabalhados e arboresce ncias calci ticas, dando robustez ao modelo construi do utilizando a superfi cie restaurada. Um importante diferencial do estudo aqui realizado foi propor a construc a o de mapas de paleobatimetria atrave s de equac o es que correlacionam a cota dos horizontes restaurados a uma profundidade paleobatime trica, o que permite ajustar melhor as profundidades da paleobatimetria a s fa cies identificadas nos poc os. Faria et al. 2017 propo s a normalizac a o da superfi cie restaurada, entre 0 e 60 m, mas desta forma perde-se a possibilidade de algum ajuste local aos dados dos poc os. - 68 - Geol. USP, Se r. cient., Sa o Paulo, v. 24, n. 1, p. 51-72, Marc o 2024 Carvalho, R. K. et al. Conforme discutido por Faria et al. 2017 , a modelagem de processos se mostra uma ferramenta poderosa que permite analisar diversos cena rios, como diferentes superfi cies paleobatime trica. Pode tambe m fornecer diversas propriedades para subsidiar a modelagem probabili stica de reservato rios, como a proporc a o de fa cies utilizada como trend na elaborac a o dos modelos de fa cies, que sa o condicionantes da distribuic a o de porosidade e permeabilidade no modelo 3D de reservato rio. CONCLUSA O No presente trabalho foi realizada a construc a o do arcabouc o estratigra fico e estrutural da a rea de Iracema, campo de Tupi, com o mapeamento de cinco horizontes si smicos e 74 falhas, onde foi caracterizado um horst assime trico de direc a o preferencial NNW-SSE, que condiciona os eventos deposicionais do intervalo sag. A a rea de Iracema esta inserida no contexto tecto nico do alto externo da Bacia de Santos e, conforme demonstrado atrave s da ana lise estrutural dos horizontes e falhas mapeadas se diferencia pela mudanc a de direc a o estrutural constatada na a rea, com o predomi nio da direc a o NNW-SSE devido a influe ncia da zona de transfere ncia de Iracema, que em conjunto com a direc a o NE-SW predominante na Bacia de Santos resulta na estrutura do S de Santos. Atrave s da reconstruc a o estrutural, foram restaurados os horizontes BVE-INF e BVE-INT a e poca da deposic a o dos carbonatos da fase sag, validando a interpretac a o si smica do horst de Iracema, estruturado pelo menos desde o final da fase rifte da Formac a o Barra Velha. E evidente a reativac a o de falhas associadas ao aumento de espessura dos intervalos em direc a o aos blocos baixos, confirmando a tecto nica sin-deposicional nos intervalos sag inferior e sag superior na a rea de estudo. Os mapas de paleobatimetria elaborados a partir das superfi cies restauradas se mostraram preditivos, demonstrando o valor de se realizar a reconstruc a o estrutural em a reas estruturalmente complexas. Estes mapas podem ser usados tanto como input na modelagem de processos em estudos de reservato rio, como tambe m diretamente na forma de um mapa de favorabilidade de fa cies em estudos explorato rios expeditos. O modelo de fa cies resultante da modelagem de processos demonstra a variac a o areal e vertical das fa cies, controladas pela paleobatimetria e a variac a o do ni vel do lago. O predomi nio de fa cies de alta energia no alto estrutural e em peri odos de ni vel baixo do lago, com aumento da proporc a o de arboresce ncia calci tica e grainstones, intercalados a ni veis de fa cies de baixa energia esferulitos depositadas durante os peri odos de transgressa o reproduziu a heterogeneidade vertical observada nos reservato rios do Pre -sal. O resultado obtido pode subsidiar a construc a o de modelos 3D de reservato rios fa cies, porosidade e permeabilidade , aumentando a previsibilidade dos estudos. Geol. USP, Se r. cient., Sa o Paulo, v. 24, n. 1, p. 51-72, Marc o 2024 AGRADECIMENTOS Somos gratos a Petro leo Brasileiro S.A., Petrobras, pela permissa o para publicar este artigo e pelo apoio fornecido a este estudo, permitindo a conciliac a o entre o trabalho e a atividade acade mica. A Age ncia Nacional do Petro leo, Ga s Natural e Biocombusti veis ANP pela liberac a o dos dados para a realizac a o do estudo. Ale m disso, gostari amos de agradecer a universidade pu blica e de qualidade que possibilitou a realizac a o deste trabalho, por meio do Programa de Po s-Graduac a o em Geocie ncias da Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro. Tambe m expressamos nossa gratida o ao editor e aos revisores por suas sugesto es construtivas que contribui ram para aprimorar o manuscrito. BIBLIOGRAFIA Adriano, M. S., Figueiredo, J. P., Coelho, P. H. G. R., Borghi, L. 2022 . Tectonic and stratigraphic evolution of the Santos Basin rift phase New insights from seismic interpretation on Tupi oil field area. Journal of South American Earth Sciences, 116, 103842. https doi.org 10.1016 j.jsames.2022.103842 Almeida, F. F., Hasui, Y., Brito Neves, B. B., Fuck, R. A. 1981 . Brazilian structural provinces an introduction. Earth-Science Reviews, 17 1-2 , 1-29. https doi. org 10.1016 0012-8252 81 90003-9 Almeida, J., Dios, F., Mohriak, W. W., Valeriano, C., Heilbron, M., Eirado, L. G., Tomazzoli, E. 2013 . Pre-rift tectonic scenario of the Eo-Cretaceous Gondwana break-up along SE Brazil-SW Africa insights from tholeiitic mafic dyke swarms. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 369 1 , 11-40. https doi.org 10.1144 SP369.24 Artaga o, V. M. 2018 . Ana lise estratigra fica de alta resoluc a o aplicada aos depo sitos da Formac a o Barra Velha, Bacia de Santos Bacia de Santos identificac a o, correlac a o e mecanismos de controle de ciclos sedimentares. Dissertac a o Mestrado . Rio de Janeiro Faculdade de Geologia, Centro de Tecnologia e Cie ncias, UERJ. Disponi vel em http www.bdtd.uerj.br handle 1 7162. Acesso em 20 dez. 2023. Bosence, D. W., Pomar, L., Waltham, D. A., Lankester, T. H. 1994 . Computer modeling a Miocene carbonate platform, Mallorca, Spain. AAPG Bulletin, 78 2 , 247-266. Disponi vel em http archives.datapages.com data bulletns 1994-96 data pg 0078 0002 0200 0247.htm. Acesso em 20 dez. 2023. Buckley, J. P., Bosence, D., Elders, C. 2015 . Tectonic setting and stratigraphic architecture of an Early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonate platform, Sugar Loaf High, Santos Basin, Brazil. In Bosence, D. W. J. et al. eds Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 418, 175-191. https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.13 - 69 - Caracterizac a o de a rea do Pre -sal da Bacia de Santos Chang, H. K., Assine, M., Correa, F. S., Tinen, J. S. 2008 . Sistemas petroli feros e modelos de acumulac a o de hidrocarbonetos na Bacia de Santos. Revista Brasileira de Geocie ncias, 38 2 , 29-46. https doi.org 10.25249 0375-7536.2008382S2946 Farias, F. A., Szatmari, P., Bahniuk, A., Franc a, A. B. 2019 . Evaporitic carbonates in the pre salt of Santos Basin genesis and tectonic implications. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 105, 251-272. https doi.org 10.1016 j. marpetgeo.2019.04.020 Cohen, A. S., Talbot, M. R., Awramik, S. M., Dettman, D. L., Abell, P. 1997 . Lake level and paleoenvironmental history of Lake Tanganyika, Africa as inferred from late Holocene and modern stromatolites. Bulletin Geological Society of America, 109, 444-460. https doi.org 10.1130 0016-7606 1997 109 0444 LLAPHO 2.3.CO 2 Gomes, P. O., Kilsdonk, B., Minken, J., Grow, T. 2008 . The Outer High of the Santos Basin, Southern Sao Paulo Plateau, Brazil Pre-Salt Exploration Outbreak, Paleogeographic Setting, and Evolution of the Syn-Rift Structures. In AAPG International Conference and Exhibition, Search and Discovery Article 10193. Cape Town, South Africa. Disponi vel em https www.searchanddiscovery.com documents 2009 10193gomes images gomes.pdf. Acesso em 05 mar. 2024. Dehler, N. M., Magnavita, L., Gomes, L., Rigoti, C., Oliveira, J., Santa nna, M., Costa, F. 2016 . The Helmut geophysical anomaly A regional left-lateral transtensional shear zone system connecting Santos and Campos basins, southeastern Brazil. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 72, 412-422. https doi.org 10.4138 atlgeol.2018.014 Dehler, N. M., Yamato, A. A., Cruz, F. E. G., Moretti Junior, P. A., Lopes, M. R. F., Zambonato, E. E., Vasconcelos, C. S., Oliveira, J. A. B., Gomes, L. C., Nogueira, M. S., Hamsi Junior, G. P., Freitas, J. T. R. 2023 . Tecto nica e sedimentac a o do Pre -sal da Bacia de Santos. In Chagas, A. A. P. Arau jo, C. C. Santos, L. A. orgs. As grandes descobertas do Pre -sal no Atla ntico Sul. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, no prelo. Dias, J., Oliveira, J., Vieira, J. 1988 . Sedimentological and stratigraphyc analysis of the Lagoa Feia Formation, rift phase of Campos basin, offshore Brazil. Revista Brasileira de Geocie ncias, 18 3 , 252-260. https doi. org 10.25249 0375-7536.1988252260 Dias, J. L. 1998 . Ana lise Sedimentolo gica e Estratigra fica do Andar Aptiano em Parte da Margem Leste do Brasil e no Plato das Malvinas - Considerac o es Sobre as Primeiras Incurso es e Ingresso es Marinhas do Oceano Atla ntico Sul Meridional. Tese Doutorado . Porto Alegre Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul. Dias, J. L. 2005 . Tecto nica, estratigrafia e sedimentac a o no Andar Aptiano da margem leste brasileira. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, Rio de Janeiro, 13 1 , 7-25. Dunbar, J. A., Cook, R. W. 2003 . Palinspastic reconstruction of structure maps an automated finite element approach with heterogeneous strain. Journal of Structural Geology, 25, 1021-1036. https doi.org 10.1016 S0191-8141 02 00154-2 Gomes, P. O., Kilsdonk, B., Grow, T, Minken, J. 2012 . Tectonic evolution of the Outer High of Santos Basin, southern Sao Paulo Plateau, Brazil, and implications for hydrocarbon exploration. In D. Gao, ed. Tectonics and sedimentation Implications for petroleum systems. McLean, Virgi nia, USA AAPG Memoir 100, p.125-142. https doi. org 10.1306 13351550M1003530 Groshong Jr, R. H., Bond, C., Gibbs, A., Ratliff, R., Wiltschko, D. V. 2012 , Preface Structural balancing at the start of the 21st century 100 years since Chamberlin, Journal of Structural Geology, 41, 1-5. https doi.org 10.1016 j. jsg.2012.03.010 Heilbron, M. L., Pedrosa-Soares, A. C., Neto, M. C. C., Silva, L. C. 2004 . Provi ncia Mantiqueira. In V.M. Mantesso-Neto, A. Bartorelli, C.D.R. Carneiro e B.B. Brito Neves Eds. . Geologia do Continente Sul-Americano, p.203-234. Sa o Paulo Editora Beca. Karner, G. D., Gambo a, L. A. P. 2007 . Timing and origin of the South Atlantic pre-salt sag basins and their capping evaporates. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 285, 15-35. https doi.org 10.1144 SP285 Lima, F., Sanjine s, A., Maizatto, J., Ferreira, E., Ng, C., Costa, D., Zerfass, G., Alves, C., Strohschoen Jr, O., Viviers, M. 2018 . Aptian marine post-salt rocks in Santos, Campos and Espi rito Santo basins, Brazil A biochrono stratigraphical approach. XLIX Congresso Brasileiro de Geologia. Rio de Janeiro SBG. Elliott, D. 1983 . The construction of balanced cross sections. Journal of Structural Geology, 5, 101. https doi. org 10.1016 0191-8141 83 90035-4 Macedo, J. M. 1990 . Evoluc a o tecto nica da bacia de Santos e a reas continentais adjacentes. In Raja Gabaglia, G.P., Milani, E.J. Eds. , Origem e Evoluc a o de Bacias Sedimentares. Petrobras, pp. 361-376. Faria, D. L. P, Reis, A. T., Souza Junior, O. G. 2017 . Three-dimensional stratigraphic-sedimentological forward modelling of an Aptian carbonate reservoir deposited during the sag stage in the Santos basin, Brazil. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 88, 676-695. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2017.09.013 Maerten, L., Maerten, F. 2006 . Chronologic modeling of faulted and fractured reservoirs using geomechanically based restoration technique and industry applications. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, 90, 1201-1226. https doi.org 10.1306 02240605116 - 70 - Geol. USP, Se r. cient., Sa o Paulo, v. 24, n. 1, p. 51-72, Marc o 2024 Carvalho, R. K. et al. Maerten, L. 2007 . Geomechanics to solve structure related issues in petroleum reservoirs. AAPG European Region Newsletter, 2, 2-3. Disponi vel em https www.searchanddiscovery.com documents 2007 07105maerten images maerten.pdf. Acesso em 05 mar. 2024. Magnavita, L. P., Dehler, N. M., Gomes, L. C., Sant anna, M. V., Souza, A. E. C. M., Menezes, J. R. C. 2010 . Arcabouc o Tecto nico e Cinema tica do Pre -sal do Sudeste Brasileiro. Petrobras, Relato rio Reservado, 55 p. Meisling, K. E., Cobbold, P. R., Mount, V. S. 2001 . Segmentation of an obliquely rifted margin, Campos and Santos basins, southeastern Brazil. American Association Petroleum Geology Bulletin. 11, 1903e1924. https doi. org 10.1306 8626D0A9-173B-11D7-8645000102C1865D Milani, E. J., Oliveira, J. A. B., Dias, J. L., Szatmari, P., Cupertino, J. A. 2005 . Basement control on structural styles and sediment pathways of Southeast Brazil Atlantic margin basins Brazil deep sedsdDeep-water sedimentation in the Southeast Brazilian margin project . In Proceedings of AAPG International Conference and Exhibition. Paris, France. Milani, E. J., Rangel, H. D., Bueno, G. V., Stica, J. M., Winter, W. R., Caixeta, J. M., Neto, O. C. P. 2007 . Bacias sedimentares brasileiras Cartas estratigra ficas - Introduc a o. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, 15 2 , 183-198. Minzoni, M., Cantelli, A., Thornton, J., Wignall, B. 2021 . Seismic-scale geometries and sequence-stratigraphic architecture of Early Cretaceous syn-post rift carbonate systems, Presalt Section, Brasil. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 509 1 , 105-126. https doi.org 10.1144 SP509-2019-78 Mohriak, W. U., Nemcok, M., Enciso, G. 2008 . South Atlantic divergent marginevolution rift-border uplift and salt tectonics in the basins of SE Brazil. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 294, 365-398. https doi.org 10.1144 SP294.19 Moreira, J. L. P., Madeira, C. V., Gil, J. A., Machado, M. A. P. 2007 . Bacia de Santos. Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, Rio de Janeiro, 15 2 , 531-549. Morley, C. K., Nelson, A., Patton, T., Munn, G. 1990 . Transfer zones in the East African Rift System and their relevance to hydrocarbon exploration in rifts. AAPG Bulletin, 74, 1234-1253. https doi.org 10.1306 0C9B2475-1710-11D7-8645000102C1865D Moulin, M., Aslanian, D., Rabeneau, M., Patriat, M., Matias, L. 2013 . Kinematic keys of the Santos Namibe basins. Geological Society, London, Special Publications. 369 1 , 91-107. https doi.org 10.1144 SP369.3 Pietzsch, R., Tedeschi, L. R., Oliveira, D. M., Anjos, C. W. D., Vazquez, J. C., Figueiredo, M. F. 2020 . Environmental conditions of deposition of the lower cretaceous lacustrine carbonates of the Barra Velha formation, Santos Basin Brazil , based on stable carbon and oxygen isotopes A continental record of pCO2 during the onset of the oceanic anoxic event 1a OAE 1a interval Chemical Geology, 535, 119457. https doi.org 10.1016 j.chemgeo.2019.119457 Rigoti, C. A. 2015 . Evoluc a o tecto nica para a Bacia de Santos com e nfase na geometria crustal Interpretac a o integrada de dados de si smica de reflexa o e refrac a o, gravimetria e magnetometria. Dissertac a o Mestrado . Rio de Janeiro Faculdade de Geologia, Centro de Tecnologia e Cie ncias, Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro. Disponi vel em http www.bdtd.uerj.br handle 1 7131. Acesso em 05 mar. 2024. Rodriguez, C. R., Jackson, C. A-L., Rotevatn, A., Bell, R. E., Francis, M. 2018 . Dual tectonic-climatic controls on salt giant deposition in the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. Geosphere, 14 1 , 215-242. https doi.org 10.1130 GES01434.1 Santi, M. R. 2002 . Procedimentos Computacionais para o Balanceamento de Sec o es Geolo gicas. Tese Doutorado . Rio de Janeiro Departamento de Engenharia Civil, Pontifi cia Universidade Cato lica do Rio de Janeiro. Disponi vel em https web.tecgraf.puc-rio.br lfm teses MarcioSanti-Doutorado-2002.pdf. Acesso em 05 mar. 2024. Souza, I. A. 2008 . Falhas de transfere ncia da porc a o norte da Bacia de Santos interpretadas a partir de dados si smicos Sua Influe ncia na Evoluc a o e Deformac a o da Bacia. Tese Doutorado . Rio Claro IGCE-UNESP. Disponi vel em http hdl.handle.net 11449 102986. Acesso em 20 dez. 2023. Szatmari, P., Lima, C. M., Fontaneta, G., Melo Lima, N., Zambonato, E., Menezes, M. R., Bahniuk, J., Coelho, S. L., Figueiredo, M., Florencio, C. P. 2021 . Petrography, geochemistry and origin of South Atlantic evaporites The Brazilian side. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 127, 104805. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2020.104805 Tedeschi, L. R., Jenkyns, H. C., Robinson, S. A., Sanjine s, A. E. S., Viviers, M. C., Quintaes, C. M. S. P., Vazquez, J. C. 2017 . New age constraints on Aptian evaporites and carbonates from the South Atlantic Implications for Oceanic Anoxic Event 1a. Geology, 45 6 , 543-546. https doi. org 10.1130 G38886.1 Pichel, L. M., Jackson, C. A. -L., Peel, F., Dooley, T. P. 2020 . Base salt relief controls salt tectonic structural style, Sa o Paulo Plateau, Santos Basin, Brazil. Basin Research, 32 3 , 453-484. https doi.org 10.1111 bre.12375 Tedeschi, L. R., Jenkyns, H. C., Robinson, S. A., Lana, C. C., Menezes Santos, M. R. F., Tognoli, F. M. W. 2019 . Aptian carbon-isotope record from the Sergipe-Alagoas Basin New insights into oceanic anoxic event 1a and the timing of seawater entry into the South Atlantic. Newsletters on Stratigraphy, 53 3 , 333-364. https doi.org 10.1127 nos 2019 0529 Geol. USP, Se r. cient., Sa o Paulo, v. 24, n. 1, p. 51-72, Marc o 2024 - 71 - Caracterizac a o de a rea do Pre -sal da Bacia de Santos Torsvik, T. H., Rousse, S., Labails, C., Smethurst, M. A. 2009 . A new scheme for the opening of the South Atlantic Ocean and the dissection of an Aptian salt basin. Geophysical Journal International. 177 3 , 1315-1333. https doi. org 10.1111 j.1365-246X.2009.04137.x Van Bemmel, P. P., Pepper, R. E. F. 2000 . Seismic signal processing method and apparatus for generating a cube of variance values , U.S. Patent - US6151555A. Disponi vel em https patentscope.wipo.int search en detail.jsf docId WO2000054207. Acesso em 03 abr 2024. Wright, V. P., Barnett, A. J. 2015 . An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates. In Bosence, D. W. J., Gibbons, K. A., Le Heron, D. P., Morgan, W. A., Pritchard, T. Vining, B. A. eds Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 418 1 , 209-219. https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.3 Wright, V. P., Tosca, N. J. A. 2016 . A Geochemical Model for the Formation of the Pre-Salt Reservoirs, Santos Basin, Brazil Implications for Understanding Reservoir Distribution. AAPG Search and Discovery, Article 51304. Woodcock, N. H., Fischer, M. 1986 . Strike-slip duplexes. Journal of Structural Geology, 8, 725-735. https doi. org 10.1016 0191-8141 86 90021-0 Zala n, P. V., Oliveira, J. A. B. 2005 . Origem e evoluc a o estrutural do Sistema de Riftes Cenozoicos do Sudeste do Brasil Boletim de Geocie ncias da Petrobras, 13, 269-300. - 72 - Geol. USP, Se r. cient., Sa o Paulo, v. 24, n. 1, p. 51-72, Marc o 2024

[END_OF_PAPER]

Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of South American Earth Sciences journal homepage www.elsevier.com locate jsames Dynamic re-sedimentation of lacustrine carbonates in the Bu zios Field, pre-salt section of Santos Basin, Brazil Sabrina D. Altenhofen a, , Amanda G. Rodrigues a, Leonardo Borghi b, Luiz F. De Ros a a Geosciences Institute, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Av. Bento Gonc alves, 9500, CEP 91501 970, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil Laboratory of Sedimentary Geology Lagesed , Department of Geology, Institute of Geoscience, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Avenida Athos da Silveira Ramos, 274, J1-013, Rio de Janeiro, 21941-916, Brazil b A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T Keywords Re-sedimentation Intraclastic deposits Santos basin Pre-salt Carbonate reservoirs The huge oil accumulations in the South Atlantic Pre-Salt section have driven studies that seek a greater un derstanding of the origin and evolution of these important reservoirs. Lacustrine carbonate intraclastic deposits correspond to the main reservoirs in the Bu zios Field, currently with the highest daily production wells in the world, and in other Santos Basin fields. However, few studies were dedicated to these deposits due to the great complexity of Pre-Salt deposits and the lack of analogs. These factors have generated intense controversies in the interpretation of their depositional models. A systematic petrographic characterization allowed detailed char acterization of the textures and primary constituents in the rift and sag sections of a well in the Bu zios Field. The bioclastic accumulations of the rift Itapema Formation, show features indicative of reworking, such as abrasion, fragmentation and disarticulation of the bivalve bioclasts. Moreover, the bioclasts occur mainly within intraclasts and as nuclei of ooids, characteristics of multicycle redeposition. The massive structure of these deposits, the lack of characteristic wave structures, their distribution in lows and conspicuous mixing with stevensitic grains indicate their gravitational redeposition, as result of the intense tectonic activity during the rift phase. The sag phase Barra Velha Formation deposits are composed of intraclasts eroded from the in situ spherulites and shrubs. These rocks are predominantly massive, lack subaerial exposure features, and display features that point to dynamic and multicyclic reworking. Furthermore, they occur intercalated with in situ deposits in high frequency, even at a thin section scale. These aspects, along with the consistency of isotope values, the widespread spatial distribution and preservation of stevensite across diverse Pre-Salt areas, suggest that gravitational, waves and currents redeposition models should be reevaluated. We propose that internal waves, generated by perturbations of the chemocline of a meromictic, stratified lacustrine system promoted recurrent reworking of the in situ de posits. This generated intraclastic levels with multicycle redeposition aspects, often interlayered with the characteristic in situ deposits. Understanding the processes that generated these deposits will contribute to reduce exploration risks and optimize hydrocarbon production from the intraclastic reservoirs. 1. Introduction calcarenites, known as coquinas as, e.g., in the Mero Field Carlotto et al., 2017 Abelha and Petersohn, 2018 Barnett et al., 2020 . Intense controversy involves the interpretation of the depositional conditions of equivalent bioclastic accumulations in the adjacent Campos Basin, opposing their reworking by waves and storms Muniz and Bosence, 2017, 2018 Mizuno et al., 2018 Oliveira et al., 2019 Olivito and Souza, 2020 to gravitational re-deposition Goldberg et al., 2017 Herlinger et al., 2017 . Recently, studies on the Santos Basin bioclastic rift de posits, brought the same discussion on the dynamics of re-sedimentation, involving reworking by current and waves Barnett et al., 2020 Chinelatto et al., 2020 , redeposition by gravity flows Leite The Pre-Salt succession holds huge oil accumulations, currently responsible for 75 of the total oil production of Brazil, which reached the equivalent of 3462 million barrels of oil per day ANP, 2023 . Furthermore, Santos Basin southeastern Brazilian margin accounts for 73 of total oil production and 75 of natural gas ANP, 2023 , high lighted by the Pre-Salt Tupi, Bu zios and Sapinhoa fields Fig. 1 . The Pre-Salt reservoirs in this basin correspond to lacustrine car bonates of the Itapema and Barra Velha formations. In the rift phase, the reservoirs of Itapema Formation are mainly bivalve calcirudites and Corresponding author. E-mail address sabrina.danni.altenhofen gmail.com S.D. Altenhofen . https doi.org 10.1016 j.jsames.2024.104863 Received 2 January 2024 Received in revised form 1 March 2024 Accepted 4 March 2024 Available online 15 March 2024 0895-9811 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. S.D. Altenhofen et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 et al., 2020 , or both Rocha et al., 2021 . The Aptian of the Barra Velha Formation carbonates were deposited over the rift deposits during the sag phase of the basin Moreira et al., 2007 , and constitute the most important reservoirs in the Bu zios Field and in other fields. These rocks were initially interpreted as microbial deposits Carminatti et al., 2008 Terra et al., 2010 , but their textural and isotopic characteristics suggest an abiotic chemical precipitation Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2020 Gomes et al., 2020 . In addition, this succession also presents thick packages of calcirudites and calcarenites composed of intraclasts reworked from the in situ deposits Barnett et al., 2018, 2021 . Although these intraclastic deposits correspond to the main reservoirs in the Bu zios Field and significant exploration targets, they received much less attention than the in situ Pre-Salt deposits. Furthermore, such thick and continuous intraclastic deposits are very rare in ancient and Recent lacustrine systems. Therefore, the focus of this study is to understand the processes that generated these reworked deposits within the rift and mainly within the sag section, in order to contribute to the reduction of exploration risks and to optimize hydro carbon production from the Pre-Salt reservoirs. et al., 2022 covered the Precambrian crystalline basement. Along the South Atlantic margins, conjugated basins formed with structural, sedimentary and configuration differences that determined the patterns of hydrocarbon accumulation Lentini et al., 2010 Blaich et al., 2011 Chaboureau et al., 2013 Saller et al., 2016 Sabato Ceraldi and Green, 2017 Aizprua et al., 2019 . According to Moreira et al. 2007 , the stratigraphic framework of Santos Basin can be divided into three main sequences rift Valanginian to Aptian , post-rift Aptian and drift Albian to Holocene . Carminatti et al. 2008 divided the rift and post-rift Pre-Salt sequences into three sub-units bounded by unconformities lower sin-rift, upper sin-rift and sag sequences. During the rift stage, mechanical subsidence developed an extensive half-grabens system, creating abundant space of accommodation for sedimentation Milani et al., 2007 Contreras et al., 2010 Blaich et al., 2011 Buckley et al., 2015 . The intrabasinal structural highs focused migration and trapped hydrocarbons, providing huge exploration po tential Gomes et al., 2009 Carlotto et al., 2017 Abelha and Petersohn, 2018 . The rift sedimentation occurred in two phases the lower rift phase, corresponding to the Pic arras Formation Barremian Fig. 2 , and the upper rift phase, corresponding to the Itapema Formation Neo barremian to Eoaptian Fig. 2 . The Pic arras Formation is composed of proximal alluvial fans of conglomerates and sandstones, and lacustrine sandstones, siltites and shales of magnesian clays mostly stevensite and kerolite Moreira et al., 2007 Leite et al., 2020 . This sequence corre sponds to the main deformation interval of the rift phase, limited at the top by the Pre-Jiquia Unconformity. The overlaying Itapema Formation was deposited mainly in shallow lacustrine environment, in the final stage of the evolution of the rift half-grabens, with decreased fault ac tivity. This unit comprises calcirudites and calcarenites of bivalve and ostracod bioclasts, intercalated with organic-rich shales, which are the main source rocks of the basin Moreira et al., 2007 Carlotto et al., 2. Geological context The Santos Basin covers approximately 350 000 km2 of southeastern Brazilian margin, extending to about 3000 m water depth, being limited to the North with the Campos Basin by the Cabo Frio High and to the South with the Pelotas Basin by the Florianopolis High Fig. 1 Moreira et al., 2007 . The origin of the Santos Basin is linked to the separation of Africa from South America during the Early Cretaceous. Rifting devel oped diachronous from south to north, forming a complex crustal stretching area with intense volcanism Blaich et al., 2011 Gomes et al., 2012 . As a result of the rupture of the continental crust, extensive tholeiitic basalts of the Camboriu Formation 135 130 Ma Gordon Fig. 1. Location maps of the Santos Basin and the studied area. A Location of the Santos Basin in eastern Brazilian margin. B Main structural features of the regional framework and oil fields of the Santos Basin, located in part of the Pre-Salt polygon red dashed . The main oil producing fields in the basin are highlighted the Tupi Field in orange, the Sapinhoa Field in green and the Bu zios Field, focus of this study, in yellow. C Detail showing the location of the studied well in the Bu zios Field. Modified from ANP www.anp.gov.br . 2 S.D. Altenhofen et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 Fig. 2. Lower Cretaceous stratigraphic chart of the Santos and Campos basins. The Itapema and Barra Velha formations are highlighted in bold. The red dashed line corresponds to the Intra-Alagoas Unconformity, as interpreted by Wright and Barnett 2015 , who included the base of Barra Velha in the upper rift phase . Modified from Barnett et al. 2018 . 2017 Lebre, 2019 Chinelatto et al., 2020 Leite et al., 2020 . These bioclastic deposits, known as coquinas , occur across the South Atlantic rift basins of the Brazilian and West African margins Thompson et al., 2015 . During the early Aptian, the Florianopolis High served as a barrier to marine influx, allowing extensive lacustrine carbonate sedimentation along the structural highs Karner and Gambo a, 2007 Szatmari and Milani, 2016 . The Barra Velha Formation was deposited in the post-rift phase sag of the basin Dias et al., 1988 Moreira et al., 2007 , after regional uplift and erosion generated the so-called Pre-Alagoas uncon formity Fig. 2 . This unit was deposited in a broad, shallow, hyper alkaline lake Wright and Barnett, 2015 Wright and Tosca, 2016 Pietzsch et al., 2018 Wright and Rodriguez, 2018 Wright, 2022 . During this stage, the activity of the main rift faults ceased or decreased significantly, indicating a predominantly thermal subsidence of the basin Moreira et al., 2007 Lentini et al., 2010 Blaich et al., 2011 Buckley et al., 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2015 . The sag section is essentially formed by magnesian clays, which predominate in the deeper settings, and by calcite spherulites and fascicular shrubs, which predominate in the shallower settings. Moreira et al. 2007 , Carminatti et al. 2008 , Terra et al. 2010 and Carvalho and Fernandes 2021 , interpreted these carbonates as microbial de posits, but they were reinterpreted by many authors as product of abiotic, chemical precipitation Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2020 Her linger et al., 2017 Tosca and Wright, 2018 Wright and Rodriguez, 2018 Lima and de Ros, 2019 Gomes et al., 2020 Carvalho et al., 2022 Wright, 2022 . Associated with these in situ deposits, there are calcir udites and calcarenites of eroded and redeposited spherulitic and fascicular intraclasts Gomes et al., 2020 Azere do et al., 2021 Wright, 2022 . The rupture of the Florianopolis High barrier and the arid climate allowed the deposition of the thick evaporitic deposits of the Ariri For mation, composed mainly of halite and anhydrite, with other, more soluble salts, such as tachyhydrite, carnallite and sylvite Szatmari et al., 1996 Karner and Gambo a, 2007 Moreira et al., 2007 Lentini et al., 2010 Szatmari and Milani, 2016 . During the Albian, the oceanic crust expansion established open marine conditions Moreira et al., 2007 . largest producing field in Brazil, with a production of approximately 772 Mboe d, accounting for 24 of the total Pre-Salt productivity ANP, 2023 . According to Tavares dos Santos and Gordon 2021 , the thick car bonate packages of the Itapema and Barra Velha Formations in the Bu zios Field were deposited in complex tectono-stratigraphy settings, with vertical and lateral facies variations, indicating a heterogeneous distribution with a wide range of reservoir properties. The sedimenta tion of the rift sequence was controlled by intense tectonism, forming a series of horst, graben and half-graben structures, with thickness ranging from 200 m on the structural highs to 2800 m in the structural lows. The lower rift sequence Pic arras Formation was highly faulted due to a complex transfer zone, while the upper rift section Itapema Formation was thinner and less affected by the tectonic activity, due to the rift expansion and subsidence decrease. The carbonates from the sag section Barra Velha Formation were deposited on the topography generated after the Pre-Alagoas unconformity, and less affected by syndepositional faulting. In the Bu zios Field, the evaporites of the Ariri Formation are up to 2650 m thick, acting as an important regional seal. Their basal layer is composed of anhydrite, followed by thick halite, intercalated with layers of anhydrite, carnallite, tachyhydrite, and sylvite, indicative of several marine water flooding and desiccation cycles Gamboa et al., 2009 . Many studies, mainly with a focus on seismic aspects, have been developed on the seismic and petrophysical log characterization of from the Bu zios Field reservoirs Castro, 2019 Castro and Lupinacci, 2019, 2022 Dias et al., 2019 Ferreira et al., 2019a, 2019b, 2021a, 2021b Lebre, 2019 Macedo et al., 2021a,b Tavares dos Santos and Gordon, 2021 Mello and Lupinacci, 2022 , although none has detailed their petrographic characteristics. According to Ferreira et al. 2019b, 2021a, b , three different seismic patterns are identified in the area build-ups, debris and aggradational progradational carbonate platforms. The interpreted build-up and debris seismic facies commonly occur aligned with faults, display higher porosity and permeability, and are inferred to be the best reservoirs. Castro 2019 , Castro and Lupinacci 2019 and Lebre 2019 concluded that the larger presence of clays is higher in Barra Velha Formation than in Itapema Formation, which would nega tively impact the reservoir quality of some of the sag rocks. However, the average thickness of the net pay effective reservoir of the Barra Velha Formation is approximately three times greater than that of the Itapema Formation. 2.1. Bu zios Field The Bu zios Field, located in ultra-deep water, 180 km off the Bra zilian coast, has a total area of 850 km2, with reservoirs 5000 to 6000 m deep. This supergiant Pre-Salt field was discovered in 2010, and since 2015 has been breaking production records, being currently the second 3. Materials and methods This petrographic study was performed over 358 thin sections from a 3 S.D. Altenhofen et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 well cored in the Bu zios Field of Santos Basin Fig. 3 . The cored interval covers about 82 m, with sixty sidewall samples localized above the core. The samples were impregnated with blue epoxy resin, and the thin sections were stained with alizarin red and potassium ferricyanide so lution for the discrimination of carbonate minerals Dickson, 1965 . Systematic quantitative petrography descriptions were performed by counting 300 points per thin section, along transects perpendicular to rock structure and fabric. The textural aspects, habits, locations and paragenetic relations of primary and diagenetic constituents and pore types were recorded using the Petroledge software De Ros et al., 2007 and documented in digital photomicrographs. The analyzed samples were classified according to the De Ros and Oliveira 2023 system. Scanning electron microscopy SEM analyzes were executed in ten selected polished and carbon-coated thin sections using backscattered electrons BSE . These analyses were performed in order to identify the distribution of constituents, and their relationships among each other and with porosity. The analyses were executed in a JEOL-6610LV electron microscope, equipped with a Brucker energy dispersive spec trometer EDS , with a working distance ranging from 8.6 mm to 12.4 mm, voltage of 12 kV and probe current of 9.3 10 5 A A . A MicroMillTM equipment was used to collect the samples for isotopic analysis of in situ calcite aggregates. Approximately 15 mg were collected in each of the 14 selected in situ samples. Isotopic analysis was performed on 9 samples for C and O isotopes, and on 5 samples for Sr isotopes Fig. 3 , with the objective of defining aspects of the paleoenvironmental conditions and diagenetic evolution. The analysis of C and O stable isotopes of two samples of the Itapema Formation and seven samples from the Barra Velha Formation was made through a Kiel IV Carbonate Device equipment, coupled to a Thermo Scientific Delta V Plus isotope ratio mass spectrometer IRMS at the Laboratory of Chemical Stratigraphy and Organic Geochemistry LGQM of the State University of Rio de Janeiro UERJ . The results obtained were compared with the standard carbonate Vienna Pee Dee Belemnite VPDB and indicated by a defined parameter Rsample - Rstandard Rstandard 1000, where R C13 C12. The accuracy was 0,04 for 13C and 0.08 for 18O. For Sr analysis, isotopic ratios of two samples of the Itapema For mation and two samples from the Barra Velha Formation were measured with a Thermo ScientificTM multicollector TritonTM, with a Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer TIMS coupled to a plasma source ICPMS at the Laboratory of Isotopic Geology LGI of the Rio Grande do Sul Federal University UFRGS . The isotopic ratios were normalized to 86 Sr 88Sr 0.1194 and each sample was analyzed to obtain 100 ratios whenever possible. The analytical precision is 0.00001 internal pre cision and repeated analyzes of the NBS-987 international reference gave an average ratio of 0.710275 0.000012 external precision . Fig. 3. Integrated log of the studied core with the position of all analyzed samples yellow dots , representative samples black dots of the main identified lithologic types, Sr red dots and C and O green dots analyses. Log aspects are commented at the end of the Results section. 4 S.D. Altenhofen et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 4. Results ooids and intraclasts, which were originally composed of stevensite or other Mg-clays. Hybrid arenites and peloidal siltites constituted essen tially by peloids and ostracod bioclasts are intensely replaced by microcrystalline calcite Fig. 5C . Hybrid sensu Zuffa, 1980 siltites with abundant peloids are lami nated Fig. 5D , commonly bioturbated, fractured and stylolitized, locally with clotted texture suggestive of microbial deposition. These deposits occur at the top of the unit, close to the pre-Alagoas uncon formity and to the contact with the Barra Velha Formation. Siliciclastic grains are, in general, angular to sub-angular monocrystalline quartz, feldspars and micas mainly muscovite . Peloids and ostracod bioclasts were intensely dolomitized and recrystallized. The hybrid siltites show intercalation of levels with a predominance of dolomite, which contain larger amounts of siliciclastic grains, or calcite, which commonly show clotted texture Fig. 5D . The rare dolostones Fig. 5E were generated by total dolomitization of the peloidal and hybrid siltites, hybrid arenites and calcarenites. Owing to the intense replacement by blocky dolomite, the peloids appear only as ghosts within the replacive dolomite. Two unusual levels of spherulitic rocks Fig. 5F occur at the base and in the middle of the cored Itapema Formation section. The host sediment of these rocks was essentially composed of peloids and ostracod bio clasts. The peloids served as nuclei for the precipitation of spherulitic calcite. These anomalous spherulstones yielded 87Sr 86Sr values of 0.7115846 and 0.7116001, 13C values of 0.47 and 0.10 VPDB, and 18O values of 0.22 and 0.48 VPDB. 4.1. Petrography of the Itapema Formation 4.1.1. Primary composition The analyzed carbonate rocks from the Itapema Formation are essentially constituted by carbonate allochems, with rare siliciclastic grains quartz, micas and feldspars . The main allochems are bivalve and ostracod bioclasts, with subordinate peloids, ooids, and intraclasts Table 1 . Bivalve bioclasts Fig. 4A are commonly disarticulated, abraded and recrystallized, or dissolved, with the derived porosity filled with calcite cement. Bivalve bioclasts also occur within intraclasts Fig. 4A and ooids. Ostracod bioclasts Fig. 4B occur both dis articulated and articulated, and are commonly associated with peloids. Gastropods are rare, commonly dissolved, with the derived porosity filled by blocky calcite. The peloids and ooids were originally composed of magnesium clays, later totally replaced by microcrystalline calcite. This is based on oc currences reported from other fields in Santos Basin e.g., Carlotto et al., 2017 Chinelatto et al., 2020 Leite et al., 2020 and from the equivalent rift section of the Campos Basin e.g., Armelenti et al., 2016 Goldberg et al., 2017 Herlinger et al., 2017 . Peloids Fig. 4C are very abundant, predominantly with fine sand size, while ooids Fig. 4D show pre dominantly coarse sand size. Most ooids are superficial with single, thin cortical coating around the nuclei or polycomposite made by two or more ooids enveloped together . The rare ooids showing radial structure were considered as originally carbonate ooliths Fig. 4D . Oncoids are rare, showing irregular, cryptocrystalline, in places clotted envelopes Fig. 4E , generated through microbial probably cyanobacteria accretion. The carbonate intraclasts are mainly peloidal Fig. 4F , but there are also macrocrystalline, microcrystalline and spherulitic intraclasts, ooidal-bioclastic intraclasts, and less commonly microbial intraclasts with clotted texture and originally dolomitic intraclasts. The complex reworking dynamics is illustrated by the occurrence of intraclasts inside other intraclasts, and of ooids with intraclastic nuclei, which will be discussed ahead. 4.1.3. Diagenetic constituents Calcite is the most abundant diagenetic constituent, occurring as microcrystalline crystals replacing originally argillaceous peloids and ooids, as blocky Fig. 6A and as prismatic rims Fig. 6A 6B filling and lining interparticle, intraparticle and moldic porosity originated by partial or complete dissolution of bioclasts, ooids and other grains Fig. 6B . Calcite rims were commonly detached from grain surfaces, and locally engulfed by blocky calcite. Calcite mosaic Fig. 5B replaced bivalve bioclasts, partially preserving their original structure, while drusiform prismatic calcite Fig. 6C and blocky calcite filled intra particle and moldic pores generated by dissolution of bivalve bioclasts. Blocky dolomite also occurs filling interparticle Fig. 6D , intraparticle and moldic porosity Fig. 6B 6C and replacing grains. The dolomite rhombs commonly replaced the blocky calcite Fig. 6B . Microcrystalline and macrocrystalline quartz and fibrous-radiated chalcedony replaced the grains partially or totally and filled the pore spaces of the hybrid arenites, calcarenites and calcirudites. Chalcedony rims covered the grains Fig. 6E or the calcite rims Fig. 6A , while macrocrystalline quartz commonly filled the center of pores Fig. 6E . Microcrystalline quartz occurs mainly replacing ooids and peloids Fig. 6E 6F , while drusiform and macrocrystalline quartz replaced mainly the bivalve bioclasts Fig. 6F . Microcrystalline pyrite is commonly associated with the silica and dolomite. In the silicified rocks, pyrite occurs mainly marking the grains margins. In the hybrid siltites, pyrite occurs replacing the grains, mainly the peloidal intraclasts and the dolomite rhombs, and concentrated along stylolites. Scarce pseudomatrix was locally produced by the compaction of mud intraclasts. Rare macrocrystalline barite and pris matic celestite filled partially or totally the interparticle, intraparticle and vugular pores. 4.1.2. Lithologic types Hybrid arenites, calcarenites, calcirudites and peloidal siltites cf. De Ros and Oliveira, 2023 are the predominant rocks in the Itapema For mation. These lithologic types range according to the compositional predominance, and occur heterogeneously through the unit. The hybrid arenites are mainly coarse, rich in ooids, subordinately in bivalve bio clasts, peloids and peloidal intraclasts Fig. 5A . The bivalve bioclasts shells occur mainly within intraclasts and as nuclei in ooids. Calcarenites and calcirudites composed mainly of bivalve bioclasts, also known as coquinas , are less common in the studied well Fig. 5B . The bivalve bioclasts are disarticulated, often fragmented and abraded, and exhibit a chaotic orientation. These shells are frequently mixed with peloids, Table 1 Quantitative data of main primary constituents of the Itapema Formation. Primary constituents Average Maximum Ooids Peloids Oncoids Bivalve bioclasts Ostracod bioclasts Gastropod bioclasts Peloidal intraclasts Microcrystalline intraclasts Macrocrystalline intraclasts Ooidal-bioclastic intraclats Microbial intraclasts Dolomite intraclasts Clastic grains quartz, mica and detrital feldspars 9.28 19.48 1 6.75 4.15 1 8.15 1 1 1 1 1 1 57.99 66.5 14.33 49.99 26.0 7.0 48.0 13.67 3.67 3.33 3.67 2.67 10.0 4.1.4. Porosity The pore types Table 2 were classified according to Choquette and Pray 1970 and vary according to the lithologic types. Calcarenites, hybrid arenites and calcirudites show mostly primary interparticle porosity and secondary intraparticle porosity from partial dissolution of mainly the ooids, bivalve bioclasts and peloidal intraclasts Fig. 7A . The partial preservation of primary porosity is controlled mainly by the interplay between partial early cementation and compaction. Moldic 5 S.D. Altenhofen et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 Fig. 4. Main primary constituents of the Itapema Formation in the Bu zios Field. A Abraded and recrystallized bivalve bioclasts, partially within intraclasts red arrows . B Disarticulated red arrows and articulated ostracods filled by calcite cement yellow arrows . C Peloids totally replaced by microcrystalline calcite. D Ooids with concentric and radial structure. E Oncoid with bioclastic nucleus and characteristic clotted microbial texture. F Peloidal intraclasts. All photomicro graphs acquired with uncrossed polarizers P . pores were generated by total dissolution of the bivalve bioclasts and ooids Fig. 7B . In some samples, the total dissolution of the grains was very intense, and moldic pores represent the main porosity type Fig. 7B . The cortical Mg-clay envelopes of ooids that were not replaced by carbonate or silica were totally or partially dissolved, forming mar ginal intraparticle porosity Fig. 7C . Microporosity pores 10 m are common in the originally argillaceous ooids and peloids, especially in the ooid envelopes Fig. 7D . Grain fracture porosity, mainly of the bivalve bioclasts, is rare. Intercrystalline porosity occurs among inter particle and intraparticle dolomite and calcite cements. In the peloidal arenites and siltites and the hybrid siltites, moldic pores, generated by the total dissolution of peloids and ostracod bio clasts, are surrounded by preserved calcite rims Fig. 7E . Primary interparticle porosity is less common in these rocks, owing to the intense calcite and dolomite cementation and to compaction. Vugular pores, formed by irregular dissolution of grains and cements, intercrystalline and fracture porosity are common in the dolostones Fig. 7F . Fractures in the hybrid siltites are commonly filled by macrocrystalline calcite. 4.2. Petrography of the Barra Velha formation 4.2.1. Primary constituents The main primary constituents of the reworked rocks of Barra Velha Formation Table 3 are intraclasts composed of spherulitic Fig. 8A , fascicular Fig. 8B and microcrystalline calcite Fig. 8C , which are the result of erosion and redeposition of the in situ deposits. Peloidal intra clasts Fig. 8D , ooids Fig. 8E and peloids Fig. 8F are also common. Less common primary constituents comprise ostracod bioclasts, silici clastic grains quartz, feldspar and micas , dolomitic and microbial intraclasts, peloidal matrix, phosphatic grains and carbonaceous fragments. The intraclasts are commonly rounded to sub-rounded, moderatelyto well-sorted, with size ranging between fine-sand to pebble, and occur in variable proportions. Microcrystalline intraclasts Fig. 8C occur mainly at the base of the analyzed Barra Velha section, while spherulitic and fascicular Fig. 8A intraclasts predominate at the top. Owing to their original shapes, spherulitic intraclasts are commonly well-rounded Fig. 8A , while the fascicular Fig. 8B and microcrystalline Fig. 8C are sub-rounded to sub-angular. Fascicular and spherulitic intraclasts show the original internal structures of the aggregates cut by their present shapes. Peloidal intraclasts occur subordinately Fig. 8D , 6 S.D. Altenhofen et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 Fig. 5. Lithotypes of the Itapema Formation A Massive hybrid arenite composed mainly of ooids, with some bivalve bioclasts, peloidal grains and muddy intra clasts. Uncrossed polarizers P . B Massive calcirudite composed mainly of recrystallized bivalve bioclasts, with some peloidal intraclasts and ooids. P . C Massive peloidal siltite. P . D Laminated hybrid siltite of peloids and siliciclastic grains. P . E Dolostone generated by total dolomitization of the original rock P . F Partially dissolved spherulstone. Crossed polarizers XP . partially dissolved, and forming a pseudomatrix when compacted. Mi crobial intraclasts with the typical clotted texture and dolomitic intra clasts are rare. Some intraclasts present distinct features as the occurrence of the intraclasts inside other intraclasts and intraclasts combining microbial and abiotic features in the same grain. As in the Itapema Formation, the peloids and clay envelopes of ooids are completely replaced by microcrystalline calcite Fig. 8F , or dis solved, without remnants of their original Mg-clay composition, which is preserved in other Pre-Salt areas of Santos Basin e.g. Da Silva et al., 2021 Carramal et al., 2022 Carvalho et al., 2022 , and Campos Basin e. g. Herlinger et al., 2020 . Ooids Fig. 8E commonly present spherulitic intraclastic nuclei and less commonly microcrystalline intraclastic nuclei. Unlike the Itapema Formation, most of the ooids analyzed in the Barra Velha section show only superficial and single cortical envelopes, commonly abraded, presenting irregular shapes. Commonly, fragments of the envelopes are detached from the grains and engulfed by inter particle cements. The complex reworking dynamics are also observed in the sag section particles. Some ooids were observed within the intra clasts and some ooids can contain an ooidal and intraclastic nucleus. The peloids silt to fine sand in size, Fig. 8F occur in the Mg-clay matrix of the spherulstones and shrubstones, commonly engulfed or replaced by the calcite aggregates, and are the main components of the peloidal siltites. Articulated and mainly disarticulated ostracod bioclasts are rare and occur mainly in the peloidal siltites and within the matrix of the in situ rocks at the base of the sag section. Phosphatic bioclasts and carbona ceous fragments are rare, occurring disseminated in the matrix of in situ rocks and in the peloidal siltites, locally concentrated in some laminae of peloidal and hybrid siltites. Spherical microorganisms with thin Mgclay, probably originally organic walls, are locally engulfed by the spherulites and shrubs, filled and replaced by calcite. The matrix among the calcite spherulites and shrubs of the in situ rocks was originally constituted essentially by magnesian clays, mostly of stevensite-kerolite composition Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2020 Tosca and Wright, 2015 Gomes et al., 2020 Da Silva et al., 2021 Carramal et al., 2022 Netto et al., 2022 , with scarce siliciclastic grains. In the analyzed samples, the matrix was extensively replaced, mainly by dolomite and silica, making its recognition and quantification difficult. In some cases, the replacement by cryptocrystalline silica and lamellar magnesite preserved the original matrix lamination. Other evidence of the former presence of matrix is the occurrence of dolomite rhombs floating in the inter-aggregate porosity, indicating that dolomite partially replaced the Mg-clays matrix, which was later dissolved. 7 S.D. Altenhofen et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 Fig. 6. Main diagenetic features of the Itapema Formation. A Interparticle porosity lined by prismatic rims red arrow and partially filled by blocky calcite stained pink . P . B BSE image of ooids with intraparticle and moldic porosity black partially filled by blocky calcite red arrows and dolomite yellow arrows . Calcite rims orange arrow and chalcedony green arrow cementing interparticle porosity. C Drusiform prismatic calcite red arrow and blocky dolomite black arrow filling dissolution porosity in bivalve bioclast. Fibrous-radiated chalcedony filling interparticle porosity yellow arrow . XP . D Blocky dolomite red arrows and calcite black arrows cementing the interparticle porosity in peloidal arenite. P . E Chalcedony yellow arrow and macrocrystalline quartz red arrow filling interparticle porosity. Microcrystalline quartz replacing grains orange arrows . XP . F Ooidal grains replaced by microcrystalline quartz orange arrows and bivalve bioclasts replaced by macrocrystalline mosaic quartz red arrows . XP . spherulites with predominantly 0.8 mm of diameter, which were precipitated displacing and replacing in variable proportion the Mg-clay laminated matrix. The spherulites precipitated in variable degrees of coalescence high, medium or non-coalesced . In the studied well, the matrix was completely replaced after the precipitation of spherulites. Shrubstones Fig. 9B are less common, occurring mainly at the top of the studied section, constituted by fascicular shrubs predominantly 1.2 mm long, precipitated as crusts by in situ growth on the sedimentwater interface, or within the Mg-clay matrix, which was later totally silicified and or dolomitized. Fascicular crusts occur predominantly as layers alternated with millimeter to centimeter levels of microcrystalline calcite and or dolomite, spherulites or intraclasts. The fascicular ag gregates commonly engulfed intraclasts, peloids and ooids. Calcarenites Fig. 9C and calcirudites Fig. 9D are predominantly massive and composed mainly of intraclasts, and less commonly of ooidal and peloidal grains. Calcarenites are predominantly medium to coarse, and moderately-sorted, showing point, long, concave-convex and sutured interparticle contacts due to heterogeneous compaction. The calcirudites are composed of intraclasts of granule size, and poorlysorted. Peloidal siltites Fig. 9E are massive or laminated, with rare Table 2 Quantitative data of the pore types in the Itapema Formation. Pore types Average Maximum Interparticle Intrapartcile Moldic Intercrystalline Grain fracture Rock fracture Vugular 3.30 2.96 2.92 1 1 1 1 12.0 10.0 25.0 1.0 1 7.0 5.0 4.2.2. Lithologic types The main lithologic types recognized in the Barra Velha Formation are spherulstones Fig. 9A and shrubstones sensu De Ros and Oliveira, 2023, Fig. 9B , which commonly occur intercalated with intraclastic calcarenites Fig. 9C and calcirudites Fig. 9D , peloidal siltites Fig. 9E , mudstones Fig. 9F and less commonly with hybrid sensu Zuffa, 1980 siltites, dolostones and cherts. Spherulstones Fig. 9A are predominantly composed of calcite 8 S.D. Altenhofen et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 Fig. 7. Main pore types in the Itapema Formation. A Preserved interparticle porosity partially cemented by thin prismatic rims and blocky calcite. Interparticle and intraparticle dissolution porosity partially cemented by blocky calcite. P . B Moldic porosity from dissolution of bioclasts, ooids and intraclasts in a calcarenite previously cemented by silica. P . C Marginal intraparticle porosity due to dissolution of the cortical clay envelopes of ooids. P . D BSE image of ooids with intraparticle microporosity, and interparticle porosity black . E Moldic porosity from ostracods dissolution, surrounded by calcite rims. P . F Vugular and intercrystalline porosity in dolostone. P . replaced, mainly by microcrystalline calcite, and less commonly by microcrystalline dolomite and quartz Fig. 9F . The locally crenulated aspect of the lamination Fig. 9F is due to micro-stylolitization formed by incipient pressure dissolution and organic matter concentration. Laminated hybrid siltites are composed of alternating levels of microcrystalline calcite and dolomite, detrital components, and less commonly ostracods, organic matter and phosphatic fragments. These rocks occur rarely at the base of the Barra Velha Formation, intercalated with laminated and massive peloidal siltites, spherulstones and mud stones Fig. 9F . Dolostones and cherts occur rarely, generated by total dolomitization or silicification of the peloidal siltites and spherulstones. Due to the intense replacement, only ghosts of peloids and ostracod bioclasts are scarcely recognizable. Table 3 Quantitative data of main primary constituents of reworked rocks of the Barra Velha Formation. Primary constituents Average Maximum Spherulitic intraclasts Fascicular intraclasts Microcrystalline intraclasts Macrocrystalline intraclasts Peloidal intraclasts Microbial intraclasts Dolomitic intraclasts Ooids Peloids Ostracod bioclasts Phosphatic grains Carbonaceous fragments Peloidal pseudomatrix Siliciclastic grains quartz, feldspar and micas 16.12 3.11 9.12 1.98 2.98 1 1 4.13 1 1 1 1 1 1 68.99 40.67 57.65 23.69 18.0 6.0 2.0 58.66 8.0 3.69 1.33 2.67 5.67 1 4.2.3. Diagenetic constituents Calcite is the most important diagenetic constituent in the in situ rocks of the sag section, precipitated as fibrous-radiated symmetric ag gregates Fig. 10A spherulites sensu Hodgson, 1968 Schroeder, 1972 Chafetz and Butler, 1980 Verrecchia et al., 1995 and as divergent fibrous asymmetric fascicular aggregates sensu Kendall, 1977 siliciclastic grains and ostracod bioclasts, and peloids totally replaced by microcrystalline calcite and dolomite. Mudstones originally constituted by laminated Mg-clays are totally 9 S.D. Altenhofen et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 Fig. 8. Main primary constituents of the Barra Velha Formation. A Spherulitic intraclasts. XP . B Fascicular crust intraclast. XP . C Microcrystalline intraclasts. P . D Partially dissolved peloidal intraclast. P . E Ooid with spherulitic intraclastic nucleus and discontinuous and superficial envelope yellow arrow replaced by microcrystalline calcite. P . F Peloids replaced by microcrystalline calcite. P . Grotzinger and Knoll, 1999 , known as shrubs Fig. 10B . The spherulites are considered eogenetic constituents sensu Cho quette and Pray, 1970 , since they grew by displacing and replacing the original unconsolidated matrix Wright and Barnett, 2020 Carramal et al., 2022 . These crystal aggregates are spherical to sub-spherical, with up to 1 mm of diameter, with characteristic radial extinction, which was in some cases lost due to recrystallization Fig. 10A or dolomitization. In some samples, there are transitional forms between spherulites and fascicular aggregates, such as asymmetric, lobate and half spherulites. The precipitation of the fascicular shrubs was partially eogenetic i.e. within the matrix , as the spherulites, and partially syngenetic i.e. on the water-sediment interface Herlinger et al., 2017 Lima and De Ros, 2019 . In the analyzed samples, the fascicular calcite aggregates occur associated with spherulites, or as crusts Fig. 10B in average 2 mm thick, planar or slightly undulating, intercalated with microcrystalline and laminated levels. The shrubs are oriented sub-vertically, coalesced or spaced, showing more than one growth phase marked by inclusions or by branching. As with the spherulites, recrystallization or dolomitiza tion modified the original fibrous fabric of the aggregates. Fascicular calcite also engulfed intraclasts and ooidal particles. Commonly, the spherulites and shrubs incorporated remnants of the matrix, mainly the peloidal grains. In addition to spherulitic and fascicular precipitates, calcite also occurs, less commonly, with blocky and macrocrystalline habits, filling intra-aggregate Fig. 10C and inter-aggregate porosity due to dissolu tion of matrix or growth-framework pores among the shrubs in the crusts. The precipitation of such coarse calcite cements normally engulfed the dolomite rhombs. Rarely, calcite occurs as discrete rims covering the spherulitic aggregates and with macrocrystalline habit filling fractures. The matrix of the in situ rocks was totally dolomitized and silicified, presenting levels with alternation of them. Dolomite is a very abundant diagenetic constituent in the Barra Velha Formation, occurring with blocky Fig. 10D 10E , mosaic and microcrystalline habits, replacing the interstitial matrix, cementing the inter-aggregate porosity mainly in the fascicular calcite crusts , and less commonly replacing the calcite aggregates. Rarely, dolomite occurs as rims covering the calcite precipitates. Silicification is very common in the in situ rocks, and occurred pervasively, forming cherts, or as localized levels or areas. Silica occurs as inter-aggregate cement of microcrystalline and macrocrystalline quartz, cryptocrystalline silica and chalcedony fibrous rims and micro spherulitic aggregates Fig. 10E 10F . Chalcedony, cryptocrystalline silica and microcrystalline quartz replaced the matrix, preserving locally relict structures of the original lamination, mainly at the top of the 10 S.D. Altenhofen et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 Fig. 9. Lithotypes of the Barra Velha Formation A Spherulstone composed of calcite spherulites in a dolomitized Mg-clays matrix. XP . B Shrubstone with crusts of fascicular calcite aggregates. XP . C Massive calcarenite composed mainly of spherulitic intraclasts. P . D Massive calcirudite composed of fascicular and peloidal intraclasts P . E Laminated siltstone, composed mainly by peloids replaced by microcrystalline calcite. P . F Mudstone constituted of laminated Mgclays replaced by microcrystalline calcite, intercalated with hybrid siltstone yellow arrows . XP . analyzed section Fig. 10E . The replacement of calcite aggregates by chalcedony, and less commonly as microcrystalline and macrocrystal line quartz is also common. Rare constituents include dawsonite, magnesite, barite, pyrite and marcasite. Fibrous, and less commonly, macrocrystalline and fibrousradiated dawsonite, and lamellar and blocky magnesite occurs replac ing the matrix and the calcite aggregates, more commonly at the top of the section. Lamellar aggregates of magnesite follow the original matrix structure, like bridges that filled the shrinkage pores from matrix dehydration Carramal et al., 2022 . Rarely, macrocrystalline barite filled inter-aggregate and fracture porosity. Microcrystalline pyrite and marcasite replaced the matrix and aggregates. Seven in situ Barra Velha samples analyzed for stable carbon and oxygen isotopes yielded 13C values ranging from 1.06 to 2.81 VPDB and 18O ranging from 0.74 and 0.19 VPDB. Two of these samples yielded 87Sr 86 values of 0.7126934 and 0.7128298. In the reworked rocks, dolomite is the most important diagenetic constituent, and occurs with blocky Fig. 11A 11B and less commonly saddle habit filling the primary interparticle porosity, and with macro crystalline to blocky habit replacing partially the grains Fig. 11B and filling intraparticle, moldic and fracture pores. Cementation generally occurred before compaction, as indicated by the loose packing observed in many samples. Rarely, the dolomite rhombs were engulfed by blocky calcite Fig. 11C . Calcite is a less common diagenetic constituent in the redeposited rocks, occurring mainly with blocky habit filling interparticle Fig. 11B and intraparticle porosity and replacing the grains. Furthermore, calcite occurs with poikilotopic habit, filling the interparticle porosity, and as rims, often detached from the grains Fig. 11D . Blocky calcite also oc curs filling vugular porosity and fractures. As in the Itapema Formation, microcrystalline calcite replaced the originally argillaceous peloids and the envelopes of ooids. Silicification is less common in the reworked than in the in situ rocks. Silica occurs totally Fig. 11E or partially filling the interparticle porosity, mainly at the base of Barra Velha Formation, as macro crystalline and drusiform quartz Fig. 11E , and less commonly as microcrystalline quartz, and as chalcedony fibrous rims and micro spherulites. Microcrystalline quartz Fig. 11E and less commonly chalcedony occur replacing totally or partially the particles, mainly the peloids and ooids. Macrocrystalline quartz and chalcedony rims also fill and line the intraparticle porosity in the dissolved intraclasts and ooids. Other less common constituent in the redeposited rocks is macro crystalline barite filling interparticle, intraparticle and fracture porosity. Some samples present mechanical compaction promoting the 11 S.D. Altenhofen et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 Fig. 10. Main diagenetic features of the in situ rocks of the Barra Velha Formation. A Detail of mildly recrystallized spherulitic calcite. XP . B Fascicular calcite partially replaced by microcrystalline quartz. XP . C Blocky calcite red arrows filling intra-aggregate porosity in a partially-dissolved calcite spherulite. P . D Blocky dolomite replacing the inter-aggregate matrix. XP . E Fibrous chalcedony, cryptocrystalline silica and blocky dolomite replacing the inter-aggregate matrix, but preserving its laminated structure. XP . F Microspherulitic chalcedony, microcrystalline and macrocrystalline quartz replacing spherulites and matrix. XP . detachment of the ooid envelopes and calcite rims from the grains Fig. 11C and generating pseudomatrix through the deformation of mud and peloidal intraclasts Fig. 11F Laminated mudstones originally constituted by Mg-clays were replaced along intercalated levels by microcrystalline calcite, dolomite or microcrystalline quartz. Locally, small spherulites 0.2 0.6 mm occur isolated or concentrated along some levels. Replacive pyrite and rare marcasite are concentrated along stylolites. In some samples, subvertical fractures were filled by macrocrystalline calcite and quartz. original matrix. Fractures cross the matrix, the calcite crusts and spherulites. Dissolution of dolomite rhombs Fig. 12C , and less commonly blocky calcite formed intracrystalline porosity. The chal cedony cements commonly present microporosity, locally impregnated with oil. The main porosity in the intraclastic calcarenites and calcirudites corresponds to preserved primary interparticle pores Fig. 12D and secondary pores generated by the partial Fig. 11B 12E or total dissolution Fig. 12F of the intraclasts and ooids. Dissolution along the margins of ooids was related to the shrinkage of their envelopes Car ramal et al., 2022 . The interparticle and intraparticle blocky dolomite, calcite and magnesite cements also present partial dissolution. Other less common pore types are fractures and those derived from the secondary interparticle dissolution of the peloidal pseudomatrix. Porosity in hybrid siltites and mudstones is absent to very low, limited to some fractures and to microporosity from the partial disso lution of the matrix and of the replacive microcrystalline calcite, dolo mite and silica. There are also rare moldic pores from the total dissolution of peloids and less commonly of ostracod bioclasts. 4.2.4. Porosity The main pore types in the in situ rocks is secondary Table 4 , generated by dissolution of the inter-aggregate matrix, in some cases recognized only by the replaced remnants of the original laminations Fig. 12A . Intra-aggregate microporosity from dissolution of the spherulites and shrubs is very common. Peloids and spherical microor ganisms included in the aggregates were commonly dissolved. In some samples, the spherulites were totally dissolved Fig. 12B , with preser vation only of the dolomite that replaced the original matrix. In fascic ular calcite crusts, dissolution generated intra-aggregate porosity and vugular pores where the inter-aggregate porosity was enlarged. Lamellar shrinkage porosity was formed by the dehydration of the 12 S.D. Altenhofen et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 Fig. 11. Main diagenetic features of the reworked rocks of the Barra Velha Formation. A Blocky dolomite partially filling interparticle porosity. P . B BSE image of partially dolomitized red arrows and dissolved grains. Blocky dolomite also partially fills the interparticle porosity yellow arrows . C Blocky calcite cementing interparticle pores and engulfing partially dissolved dolomite rhombs red arrow . Detached calcite rims yellow arrow . P . D Calcite rims covering the grains and lining the interparticle porosity yellow arrows . P . E Microcrystalline quartz replacing some grains yellow arrows . Macrocrystalline and drusiform quartz cementing the interparticle porosity red arrows . XP . F Pseudomatrix generated by the compaction of mud intraclast. P . 4.3. Log aspects in addition to the scarce literature on lacustrine carbonates, even less on re-sedimented lacustrine carbonate deposits. In the following discus sion, we will approach the primary aspects observed in the studied de posits, in relation to the main models presented in the literature, including those from the equivalent deposits of the Campos and Kwanza basins. The log signatures of the Itapema and Barra Velha formations in the studied well, and representative lithologic types of the two units are shown in Fig. 3. The log signatures in the studied interval are charac teristic of the units in many Santos Basin areas see, e.g., Gomes et al., 2020 Tavares dos Santos and Gordon, 2021 Camargo et al., 2022 Carvalho et al., 2022 Rebelo et al., 2022 . Owing to the absence or scarcity of potassium-rich clays, gamma-ray values are generally low, and some of the GR peaks correspond to uranium in bitumen. The density, NMR porosity and permeability of the Itapema Formation are much more homogeneous than those of the Barra Velha Formation, due to the significant variation of the depositional and diagenetic features of the latter. 5.1. Depositional conditions of the Itapema Formation Most of the works published about bioclastic accumulations depos ited in the rift phase were developed in the Coqueiros Formation, the equivalent of the Itapema Formation in the adjacent Campos Basin Castro et al., 1981 Schaller et al., 1981 Baumgarten, 1985 Bertani and Carozzi, 1985 Dias et al., 1988 Abraha o and Warme, 1990 Horschutz and Scuta, 1992 Carvalho et al., 2000 Guardado et al., 2000 Rangel and Carminatti, 2000 Dias, 2005 Castro, 2006 Carminatti et al., 2008, Muniz, 2013 Bizotto, 2014 Armelenti et al., 2016 Corre a, 2016 Goldberg et al., 2017 Herlinger et al., 2017 Mizuno et al., 2018 Muniz and Bosence, 2018 Oliveira et al., 2019 Olivito and Souza, 2020 . Some studies were published on the African margin Pre-Salt rift deposits Harris et al., 1994 Harris, 2000 Thompson et al., 2015 Saller et al., 5. Discussion The depositional conditions of the Itapema Formation and of the Barra Velha Formation have been a matter of heated debate in the literature due to the complex and unusual characteristics of the Pre-Salt deposits, and the lack of ancient and modern analogs to serve as models, 13 S.D. Altenhofen et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 Baumgarten et al., 1988 Dias et al., 1988 Carvalho et al., 2000 Castro, 2006 , which by definition are deposits composed of fragmented bio clasts with intense abrasion Pettijohn, 1975 De Wet et al., 2002 Scholle and Ulmer-Scholle, 2003 Flu gel, 2004 Gierlowski-Kordesch, 2010 . The rift bioclastic deposits of Campos and Santos basins were mostly interpreted as product of reworking of waves and or currents induced by storms Carvalho et al., 2000 Muniz, 2013 Thompson et al., 2015 Muniz and Bosence, 2017, 2018 Mizuno et al., 2018 Barnett et al., 2020 Chinelatto et al., 2020 Olivito and Souza, 2020 Antunes, 2021 . However, the absence of stratification and lamination i.e., structures typical of wave deposits , the poor sorting and chaotic to concave-up orientation of the bioclasts in many of the bioclastic deposits led Goldberg et al. 2017 to reinterpreted most of the bioclastic rift deposits of Campos Basin as redeposited by gravity flows. The same was interpreted by Harris 2000 for the equivalent rift bioclastic carbonates of the Toca Formation in the Congo Basin. In addition, Goldberg et al. 2017 described that the Campos Basin bioclastic deposits are commonly distributed in the rift half-graben lows, characteristic indic ative of gravitational redeposition, and show conspicuous mixing with stevensitic grains. As stevensite precipitates only under highly alkaline conditions, which are incompatible with the survival of bivalves, this would indicate the re-depositional mixing of the two constituents Armelenti et al., 2016 Goldberg et al., 2017 Leite et al., 2020 . Such gravitational redeposition makes sense within the tectonic context of the rift phase, which actively controlled the depositional geometries and facies distribution Guardado et al., 2000 . The rift phase recurrent tectonic pulses remobilized shallow lacustrine deposits to the deeper areas Goldberg et al., 2017 . Leite et al. 2020 considered that, beyond tectonism, storms, and or slope destabilization would be responsible for high-density bioclastic gravity flows in the Tupi Field area of Santos Basin. Under such conditions, the composition of the re-sedimented deposits would be controlled by the tectono-sedimentary dynamics and by the original composition of the marginal deposits, without direct relation to the creation of accommodation space by transgressive and regressive events Goldberg et al., 2017 . Most likely, the two models would have coexisted in the dynamic rift conditions, with deposits reworked by waves and currents in shallow waters and redeposited by gravitational flows into deep settings. This is considered by some authors for bioclastic deposits from the Campos Basin Mizuno et al., 2018 Oliveira et al., 2019 and the Santos Basin Carlotto et al., 2017 Chinelatto et al., 2020 Leite et al., 2020 Rocha et al., 2021 . Carlotto et al. 2017 interpreted the seismic structure of bioclastic reservoirs from the Mero Field, Libra Area of the Santos Basin, as mounds surrounded by progradational to chaotic wedges of deeper re-sedimented deposits. More recently, Barnett et al. 2020 concluded that the model of gravitational re-sedimentation is not applicable to the Mero Field, considering the scarcity of sin-sedimentary deformation features and the predominance of paleocurrents parallel to the coast. For those authors, the mounds observed by Carlotto et al. 2017 are cli noforms up to 100 m thick that represent large bars produced through the re-working of the bivalves by shore-parallel currents as also inter preted for Campos Basin by Olivito and Souza, 2020 , and not by gravitational re-sedimentation. The 87Sr 86Sr values 0.7115846 and 0.7116001 for two anomalous spherulitic samples collected from the Itapema Formation section of the studied well are significantly less radiogenic than those of the sag spherulstones 0.7126934 and 0.7128298 Pietzsch et al., 2018 Lima et al., 2020 . The 87Sr 86Sr values of these two anomalous rift spherul stones correspond to those of the coquina samples characteristic of the rift interval. On the other hand, the 13C and 18O values of these samples 13C 0.47 and 0.10 VPDB and 18O 0.22 and 0.48 VPDB are quite similar to those of the sag Barra Velha Formation Pietzsch et al., 2018 Wright, 2022 . Therefore, even if similar precipitation conditions, likely related to strong evaporative conditions, occurred locally in the rift, the fluid composition and source of the rift was still Table 4 Quantitative data of the pore types in the Barra velha Formation. In situ rocks Pore types Inter-aggregate matrix dissolution Intra-aggregate shrub dissolution Intra-aggregate spherulite dissolution Shrinkage Rock fracture Aggregate fracture Intracrystalline Vugular Average Maximum 3.0 1.16 2.58 1 1 1 1 1 20.0 5.0 15.0 1.5 2.0 1.0 1 8.0 Reworked rocks Pore types Interparticle Intraparticle intraclast dissolution Intraparticle ooid dissolution Moldic Grain frature Rock fracture Pseudomatrix dissolution Intracrystalline Vugular Average Maximum 5.39 4.03 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 22.33 18.0 6.0 11.67 1.33 4 7.67 2.33 5.0 2016 Sabato Ceraldi and Green, 2017 . Only more recently studies were published on the Itapema Formation Carlotto et al., 2017 Barnett et al., 2020 Chinelatto et al., 2020 Leite et al., 2020 Antunes, 2021 Oliveira et al., 2021 Rocha et al., 2021 Tavares dos Santos and Gordon, 2021 . Similarly to the Campos Basin, more than 500 m thick bioclastic packages of the Itapema Formation occur in some Santos Basin areas Antunes, 2021 . These deposits are described as grainstones and rud stones of disarticulated and fragmented bivalve shells with minor amounts of ostracods and gastropods Carlotto et al., 2017 Chinelatto et al., 2020 Tavares dos Santos and Gordon, 2021 . Stevensite ooids and peloids, siliciclastic grains, phosphate bioclasts, stevensite and carbon ate intraclasts and volcanic fragments occur in variable amounts throughout the basin Carlotto et al., 2017 Oliveira et al., 2019 Chi nelatto et al., 2020 Leite et al., 2020 Tavares dos Santos and Gordon, 2021 . As observed by Leite et al. 2020 and Tavares dos Santos and Gordon 2021 , the analyzed bioclastic deposits predominantly show features indicative of reworking. These include the abrasion, fragmentation and disarticulation of the bivalve bioclasts Fig. 4A , and their occurrence within intraclasts Rocha et al., 2021 Barnett et al., 2020 and as nuclei in ooids Fig. 4 A 13A . Another feature indicative of redeposition is the common mixing of bivalve bioclasts with peloids, ooids and intraclasts originally constituted of stevensite or other Mg-clays Fig. 4A 5A 5B , as the latter are formed in highly alkaline environments incompatible with the survival of bivalves Goldberg et al., 2017 . Furthermore, the occurrences of intraclasts within other intraclasts, of ooids with intra clastic nuclei, and of ooids within intraclasts corroborate the complex dynamic multicyclic reworking Fig. 13 . The siliciclastic grains of quartz, feldspars and micas, and the vol canic fragments described in some studies in the bioclastic deposits Carvalho et al., 2000 Muniz, 2013 Bizotto, 2014 Mizuno et al., 2018 Muniz and Bosence, 2018 Oliveira et al., 2019 Leite et al., 2020 are interpreted as result from mixing by storm waves and currents close to the lacustrine rift margins Carvalho et al., 2000 Mizuno et al., 2018 Muniz and Bosence, 2018 . Siliciclastic grains are absent or very rare in the analyzed samples average 1 Table 1 , indicating a very limited contribution from the plutonic basement rocks, as well as volcanic sources. Controversies have developed over the interpretation of the deposi tional conditions of the bioclastic accumulations from the upper rift sequence. These deposits were considered originally as coquinas 14 S.D. Altenhofen et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 Fig. 12. Main pore types in the Barra Velha Formation. A Inter-aggregate, from the partial dissolution of the laminated matrix. B Moldic and intercrystalline pores from the dissolution of calcite spherulites in a dolomitized spherulstone. C Partial dissolution of inter-aggregate blocky dolomite, with bitumen. D Preserved interparticle porosity in an intraclastic calcarenite. E Intraparticle, from partial dissolution of a spherulitic intraclast. F Moldic and intraparticle porosity in a silicacemented calcarenite. All photomicrographs acquired with uncrossed polarizers. different from what would later develop in the hyperalkaline sag lacustrine system. geochemistry of the lake waters Herlinger et al., 2017 Pietzsch et al., 2018 Wright and Barnett, 2020 Carvalho et al., 2022 Wright, 2022 . The lack of analogs of the Pre-Salt sag deposits generated a series of conflicting depositional models. The unusual lacustrine carbonates spread along at least 330 000 km2 considering their known extension in Santos, Campos and Kwanza basins Wright, 2022 , and probably up to 1 000 000 km2, considering the extension of the overlying evaporites. There are no compatible or even partially equivalent occurrences with the extension and the types of deposits of the Pre-Salt sag succession in the geological record or in Recent environments, making the identifi cation of the conditions of their formation quite challenging. Therefore, even the main depositional environment of the Pre-Salt succession has been widely discussed in the literature, from epiconti nental shallow marine Dias, 2005 , to transitional between continental and shallow marine Moreira et al., 2007 Carminatti et al., 2008 For migli et al., 2009 Gomes et al., 2009 , lacustrine carbonate platforms Buckley et al., 2015 Kattah, 2017 Ferreira et al., 2019a Minzoni et al., 2020 , and to an evaporitic, hyperalkaline and shallow lacustrine environment Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2017 Wright and Rodriguez, 2018 Kirkham and Tucker, 2018 Pietzsch et al., 2018, 2020 Carvalho et al., 2022 Wright, 2022 . The lack of marine fossils and syngenetic sulfates, the very restrict 5.2. Depositional conditions of the Barra Velha formation The Pre-Alagoas unconformity Moreira et al., 2007 marks a very expressive lithological change, from the bioclastic deposits of the Ita pema Formation to the chemical deposits of the Barra Velha Formation, indicating very distinct environmental and lacustrine system conditions. In the study, this change is observed by the disappearance of the bivalve bioclasts, which are very common in the Itapema Formation. Above the unconformity, the in situ deposits are essentially constituted by spher ulitic and fascicular calcite and by Mg-clay laminated and peloidal matrix, with subordinate siliciclastic silt and fine sand. The composition of reworked deposits from the Barra Velha Formation is also clearly distinct from the reworked rift deposits, since they are essentially composed of intraclasts eroded from the in situ deposits. The high-frequency intercalation of the reworked and in situ deposits is also noteworthy. The occurrence of stevensite and the remarkable absence of fauna, except for rare occurrences of ostracods and phos phatic bioclasts, point to a highly restricted and alkaline environment, where mineral precipitation was primarily governed by the 15 S.D. Altenhofen et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 Fig. 13. Multicyclic reworking characteristics of the Itapema Formation. A Bivalve bioclasts within intraclasts and as nuclei of ooids. B Ooid developed covering a partially dissolved intraclast containing another intraclast. C Ooids with complex intraclastic nuclei. D Ooid within an intraclast. All photomicrographs acquired with uncrossed polarizers. fauna, of almost exclusively ostracods, and the values of 87Sr 86Sr, significantly higher than those of Cretaceous marine waters, are evi dence of a non-marine origin Pietzsch et al., 2018 Wright, 2022 . The dry climate promoted intense evaporation of the lake waters, what combined with the volcanic basement and the coeval magmatism and hydrothermalism resulted in an extensive alkaline system, although without large-scale desiccation and exposure Pietzsch et al., 2018, 2020 Wright, 2022 . On the other hand, the suggestion of a system consisting of small isolated lakes with only episodic lateral connection, and extensive exposed areas, as proposed, e.g., by Arienti et al. 2018 and Farias et al. 2019 , is contradicted by the lateral continuity of the seismic reflectors and stratigraphic units Wright and Barnett, 2017 , and by the occur rence of the same facies and 13C and 18O values in the Santos, Campos and Kwanza basins Sabato Ceraldi and Green, 2017 Pietzsch et al., 2020 . The limited variation of the 13C and 18O values of the in situ samples analyzed in the studied well 13C ranging between 1.06 and 2.81 VPDB, and 18O between 0.74 and 0.19 VPDB are compatible with the values reported in the literature for the sag carbonates Sabato Ceraldi and Green, 2017 Farias et al., 2019 Lima et al., 2020 Pietzsch et al., 2020 , and indicate a closed and relatively large lacustrine system Sabato Ceraldi and Green, 2017 Pietzsch et al., 2018, 2020 . Such system would have involved equilibration between the lake water and the atmosphere through CO2 degassing, as well as significant evapora tion Pietzsch et al., 2020 . Together with these aspects, there is a lack of features characteristic of exposure within the sag interval. Such aspects should include calcretes and dolocretes with meteoric 18O values, vadose pendular and meniscus cements, oxidation, and clay cutans cf. Esteban and Klappa, 1983 Railsback et al., 2012 . Additionally, the original stevensite matrix is commonly preserved, while the subaerial exposure of stevensite would extensively promote its alteration to sepiolite cf. Chahi et al., 1997 Pozo and Calvo, 2018 . All these aspects indicate that the pre-salt sag constituted a single, vast lacustrine system, rather than multiple small lakes. A microbial origin has been proposed by some authors for the characteristic in situ deposits made of calcite fascicular shrubs and spherulites and Mg-clays e.g., Terra et al., 2010 Rezende and Pope, 2015 Muniz and Bosence, 2015 Mercedes-Marti n et al., 2017 Kirkham and Tucker, 2018 Chafetz et al., 2018 Carvalho and Fernandes, 2021 Arau jo et al., 2022 . However, the fibrous fabric and the stable isotope composition of the calcite shrubs and spherulites indicate that they are a product of abiotic chemical precipitation Wright and Barnett, 2015 Herlinger et al., 2017 Lima and De Ros, 2019 Gomes et al., 2020 Wright and Barnett, 2020 Wright, 2022 . Their 13C and 18O values indicate a relative equilibrium between atmospheric and lake water CO2 Pietzsch et al., 2020 . The deposition of lacustrine carbonate facies of the sag was prefer entially developed on structural highs, remaining from the erosion along the Pre-Alagoas unconformity, as in the Tupi Field Carvalho et al., 2022 Sommer et al., 2022 , or created by reactivation of the rift system faults, what apparently was the case in the Bu zios Field Ferreira et al., 2019a Macedo et al., 2021b Tavares dos Santos and Gordon, 2021 . Some of the reactivated faults apparently controlled the genesis of car bonate mounds interpreted in the seismic lines, as well as the hydro thermal alteration of some Pre-Salt reservoirs Lima et al., 2020 Hunt, 2021 Mendes et al., 2022 . The mound aspect of sag carbonate structures seen in the Pre-Salt seismic lines e.g., Minzoni et al., 2020 and the shrub morphology characteristic of the in situ deposits has conducted some authors e.g., Terra et al., 2010 Boyd et al., 2015 Virgone et al., 2021 Erthal et al., 2022 to interpret part of the deposits as travertines. However, the fast, complex facies variations away from the spring conduits, and the frac tionated stable isotopes values characteristic of subaerial travertines e. g., Gandin and Capezzuoli, 2008 Fouke, 2011 , are absent from the Pre-Salt deposits, as are also absent subaerial exposure features. Some of the mounds may have been produced by sub-lacustrine travertine sys tems Della Porta, 2015 . However, the morphological and isotopic as pects of the fascicular shrub deposits of these mounds are identical to those of the shrubstones distributed widely and away from the mounds. Rodri guez-Berriguete et al. 2022 examined specifically the potential analogies of the Pre-Salt shrub deposits with travertines, observing that they totally differ in the lateral and vertical facies changes, in saturation 16 S.D. Altenhofen et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 conditions and flow energy. They concluded that travertines are not a good analogue for Pre-Salt reservoir geometry and facies distribution, although potentially providing clues on how the shrubs were precipi tated. Therefore, the characterization of some of the seismically iden tified mounds as sublacustrine travertines requires further investigation. Evaluating the origin of the intraclastic deposits from the Barra Velha Formation, Barnett et al. 2018 2021 defined two distinct depositional configurations for the extensive and continuous packages of intraclastic rudstones and grainstones that appear intercalated with the in situ shrub and spherulite deposits of the Barra Velha Formation. The first, would be characterized by well-sorted, sharp-based, fining-up packages, with mainly planar low angle stratification, locally planar cross lamination, deposited along the escarpment and dip slope of fault blocks, and interpreted as carbonate fan delta shorelines with wave-reworked sheet flood or terminal splay deposits, as also interpreted by Wright 2022 . The second, would be defined by coarser, immature and thick packages adjacent to narrow and elongated mounds located along faulted blocks margins, interpreted as formed by the subaerial disaggregation of mounds composed mainly of shrubs. However, Wright and Rodriguez 2018 argued that the seismic lines presented by Barnett et al. 2018 fail to meet the Burgess et al. 2013 criteria for identifying carbonate buildups, which include, for example, high-angle margins, reflector thickening and increase in steepness, seismic facies differentiation, onlap, fracturing and collapse, truncation of reflectors by karst, among others. Wright and Rodriguez 2018 commented additionally that the seismic facies showing apparent cli noform features can be attributed either to seismic effects of the over lying evaporites or to post-depositional tectonics. A particularly important aspect of the Pre-Salt intraclastic facies is their frequent occurrence over highs in diverse areas, where the shrubstones were also deposited. This seems to occur, for instance, in the Tupi Field Carvalho et al., 2022 Sommer et al., 2022 , in the Bu zios Field Ferreira et al., 2021a, 2021b Tavares dos Santos and Gordon, 2021 , in other areas of the Santos Basin Camargo et al., 2022 Rebelo et al., 2022 , and in the Kwanza Basin Saller et al., 2016 . This distri bution is not compatible with a gravitational model for these occurrences. Centimetric intercalations between intraclastic and in situ deposits are very frequent in the analyzed well. The same was observed by Azere do et al. 2021 , Carvalho et al. 2022 and Rodri guez-Berriguete et al. 2022 , indicating rapid changes in the hydrodynamic conditions. Along the well, the high frequency intercalation of in situ and reworked deposits occurs even at a thin section scale Fig. 14 . The intercalation of intraclastic and in situ deposits is observed both by the recurrent erosion Fig. 14. Examples of intercalations of chemical in situ and hydrodynamic intraclastic deposits.observed at thin section scale, indicative of a dynamic depositional process changes. A and B Calcarenite composed of spherulitic and fascicular intraclasts covered by spherulstone. P and XP . C and D Coalesced, intensely recrystallized shrubstone overlain by calcarenite composed of spherulitic and fascicular intraclasts. P and XP . E and F Shrubs engulfing ooids and intra clasts. XP . 17 S.D. Altenhofen et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 and redeposition of shrubs and spherulites, and by the encrustation of intraclasts and ooids by fascicular calcite Fig. 14 . Frequently, this alternation occurs as millimeter-thin layers. Furthermore, the intraclasts typically exhibit a rounded to sub-rounded shape and show a moderate to good sorting. This distribution and textural characteristics are un likely to result from gravitational redeposition. Gravitational deposits formed through slope redeposition of shallow water carbonate sedi ments typically exhibit restricted spatial distribution and strong lateral grain size variations Playton et al., 2010 . These patterns contrast with the commonly widespread distribution and good selection of most redeposited Pre-Salt facies. Nevertheless, subaqueous gravitational redeposition remains a viable mechanism for some intraclastic deposits close to the Pre-Salt mounds characterized by poor sorting and coarse grain size Fig. 15A . The importance and extension of this process was probably limited by the absence of sub aerial exposure and the limited syndepositional tectonism in the succession. The interlayering between fascicular calcite and intraclastic deposits was interpreted by Carvalho and Fernandes 2021 and Carvalho et al. 2022 as product of the activity of waves and currents, based on observed sedimentary structures indicative of tractive processes, such as low-angle cross-stratification, wave ripples, and hummocky cross-stratification. The same was interpreted by Saller et al. 2016 for the intraclastic deposits of the Kwanza Basin. However, such structures are not observed in the analyzed reworked rocks, which are predomi nantly massive. Wave reworking remains, nevertheless, a viable rede position process in a huge lacustrine system such as the interpreted South Atlantic Pre-Salt sag Fig. 15B . Another mechanism that could have promoted the observed subtle and recurrent re-deposition would be internal waves Ba denas et al., 2012 Pomar et al., 2012 Morsilli and Pomar, 2012 . Internal waves are generated by hydrostatic perturbation of the interface chemocline between a less dense upper level epilimnion and a lower denser hy polimnion water in stratified, meromictic saline lakes Munk, 1981 Apel, 2002 or restrict marine gulfs or lagoons. In stratified water bodies, perturbations in the chemocline are common and may be pro moted by superficial currents and or waves, wind stress fluctuations, subaqueous slides, or by tectonic activity Pomar et al., 2012 . Internal waves have lower frequency and larger amplitude than surface waves. The breaking of internal waves occurs where the chemocline intersects the bottom, leading to episodic reworking and transport of sediments Pomar et al., 2012 Pomar and Haq, 2016 . According to Pomar et al. 2012 , these deposits can be concentrated in discrete intervals. There fore, internal waves would provide a viable mechanism for the genera tion of thin intraclastic levels and their high frequency intercalation with in situ deposits Fig. 15C . As previously discussed, such high frequency changes in the depo sitional conditions cannot be attributed to lake level variations, as proposed by, e.g., Gomes et al. 2020 , Pietzsch et al. 2020 , Azere do et al. 2021 , Carvalho and Fernandes 2021 , Wright 2022 , Tonietto et al. 2023 and Rodri guez-Berriguete et al. 2022 , considering the huge dimensions and the lack of evidence of subaerial exposure of the Pre-Salt lacustrine system. Fluctuations in the lake level are typically regarded as the main factor contributing to changes in the water chemistry of most lacustrine systems. However, the recurrent and high frequency variations in the chemical composition and depositional en ergy of the very large alkaline Pre-Salt lacustrine system cannot be attributed to this mechanism. For this system, a scenario with a near constant lake level, where the variations arise from oscillations within a stratified system would be more suitable. Another significant observation within the reworked deposits in volves the occurrence of multicycle redeposition Fig. 16 . There are ooids within intraclasts, intraclasts within ooids, and intraclasts within intraclasts. This occurrence of multiple cycles within the same grain is indicating a dynamic environment, characterized by frequent fluctua tions in the hydrodynamic conditions, as suggested by Carramal et al. 2022 . This could be better explained by the perturbations caused by internal waves Fig. 15C , leading to recurrent reworking. The observed Barra Velha Formation ooids are primarily constituted by thin, commonly single clay envelopes around intraclastic nuclei Fig. 8E 14B , as reported by Carramal et al. 2022 for the Tupi Field area. This contrasts with the rift section ooids, which present thicker envelopes around siliciclastic, volcanoclastic or bioclastic nuclei Ber tani and Carozzi, 1985 Rehim et al., 1986 Armelenti et al., 2016 Goldberg et al., 2017 Leite et al., 2020 . Although ooids are generally associated with relatively high-energy conditions, these superficial ooids may have been formed in relatively lower energy conditions than in the rift interval, through heterogeneous precipitation over their larger intraclastic nuclei. Frequently, the observed superficial ooids occur as discrete levels Fig. 14 A and B intercalated with in situ levels. The sag ooids show signs of reworking during further redeposition events Car ramal et al., 2022 , represented by abraded margins and partial pres ervation of the envelopes, mostly on the concave portions of the grains surfaces. Such recurrent reworking, of calcite intraclasts as nuclei of clay ooids, later reworked, might be attributed to frequent hydrodynamic perturbations recurrently eroding and redepositing the grains Fig. 15C . The clay peloids may have been deposited in intermediate energy conditions between those of the ooids and the laminated Mg-clay deposits characteristic of the sag Armelenti et al., 2016 Herlinger et al., 2017 . Part of the peloids may have been formed by flocculation due the salinity variations Carramal et al., 2022 . Some of these particles may be associated with the reworking of the previously deposited laminated clays. 6. Conclusions The systematic petrographic analysis of the intraclastic deposits from the rift Itapema and sag Barra Velha Formation within a Bu zios Field well exhibited the complex nature of the reworked pre-salt deposits. Observations regarding textures and primary constituents were compared with those described in the proposed published, in order to understand the depositional processes and environments. In the Itapema Formation, bioclastic deposits predominantly show features indicative of reworking as abrasion, fragmentation and disarticulation of the bivalve bioclasts, and their occurrence within intraclasts and as nuclei of ooids. The complexity of the particles points to a dynamic and multicyclic reworking. The distribution in lows, chaotic orientation and the common mixing of bivalve bio clasts with peloids, intraclasts and ooids originally constituted of stevensite or other Mg-clays indicates gravitational redeposition. Nevertheless, features indicative of waves and currents observed in other pre-salt areas suggest that both gravitational and wave and or current-driven reworking processes likely coexisted. Conversely, the intraclastic deposits of the Barra Velha Formation consist of intraclasts eroded from in situ spherulitic and fascicular shrub deposits. These reworked deposits showing features of multi cycle redeposition and are widely distributed and often intercalated with in situ deposits throughout the sag interval. Considering this, the two models proposed in the literature to explain the formation of these deposits are controversial. The lack of subaerial exposure features, good sorting, and occurrence on structural highs of many sag intraclastic deposits, seem to exclude a gravitational redeposition model. Likewise, the lack of structures indicative of traction processes, such as low-angle and hummocky cross-stratification, current and wave ripples do not support an interpretation of reworking by waves and currents for most examined reworked rocks, which exhibit a pre dominantly massive structure. Internal waves, generated through perturbation of the chemocline in the large stratified, meromictic alkaline lacustrine system may have been responsible for the subtle and recurrent observed re-deposition, 18 S.D. Altenhofen et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 Fig. 15. Schematic representation of the depositional models suggested for the reworked Aptian pre-salt rocks. A Gravitational redeposition associated with mounds, based on Barnett et al. 2018 model. Mounds composed of thick stacked packages of in situ shrubs eroded by subaerial exposure, forming thick aprons of poorly-sorted debris. B Redeposition by waves and currents, based on Tucker and Wright 1990 and Saller et al. 2016 . In situ deposits on structural highs reworked by storm waves and currents, displaying structures indicative of tractive processes. Deeper-water facies consisting of muddy sediments with spherulites. C Internal waves model, based on Pomar et al. 2012 , proposed to explain the widespread and recurrent occurrence of high-frequency alternations between intraclastic and in situ deposits. Perturbations in the chemocline generate internal waves, promoting subtle, multicycle reworking and limited transportation of sediments. 19 S.D. Altenhofen et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 decisively contribute to reduce exploration risks and optimize hy drocarbon production from the intraclastic reservoirs. CRediT authorship contribution statement Sabrina D. Altenhofen Writing original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Amanda G. Rodrigues Writing review editing, Supervision. Leo nardo Borghi Project administration, Funding acquisition. Luiz F. De Ros Writing review editing, Supervision, Methodology, Conceptualization. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare the following financial interests personal re lationships which may be considered as potential competing interests Sabrina Danni Altenhofen reports financial support was provided by Shell Brazil. If there are other authors, they declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Data availability The data that has been used is confidential. Acknowledgements This research was developed as part of the doctoral research of SDA at the Rio Grande do Sul Federal University, carried out in association with the R D project registered under ANP n.20225-9, PRESAL Geological characterization of carbonate reservoirs from the Pre-salt interval of Santos Basin, correlates and analogs , developed by the Laboratory of Sedimentary Geology Lagesed of the Rio de Janeiro Federal University UFRJ, Brazil , sponsored by Shell Brazil under the ANP R D levy as Compromisso de Investimentos com Pesquisa e Desenvolvimento . The authors are very grateful to project coordination by Michele C.A.S. da Silva and Julia Favoreto, and to colleagues Gilberto Raitz Ju nior, for providing the log of the studied core and Douglas Renato L. da Silva for sampling for isotope analysis. References Abelha, M., Petersohn, E., 2018. The State of the Art of the Brazilian Pre-salt Exploration. Search and Discovery Article 30586. Adapted from Oral Presentation Given at AAPG 2018 Annual Convention and Exhibition. Salt Lake City, Utah, United States, May 20-23, 2018. Abraha o, D., Warme, J.E., 1990. Lacustrine and associated deposits in a rifted continental margin-lower cretaceous Lagoa Feia Formation, Campos basin, offshore Brazil. In Katz, B.J. Ed. , Lacustrine Basin Exploration Case Studies and Modern Analogs. AAPG Memoir 50, pp. 287 305. Aizprua, C., Cherry, A., Messager, G., Lapponi, F., Hunt, D., Drehmer, L., 2019. Structurally-controlled distribution of Pre-Salt carbonate facies at a rift propagation system Santos Basin, Brazil, First EAGE Workshop on Pre-Salt Reservoir from Exploration to Production. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, December 5-6, 2019. Anp, 2023. Boletim de Produc a o de Petro leo e Ga s Natural 08 2023. Nu mero 156. htt ps www.gov.br anp. Antunes, R.C., 2021. Modelo deposicional das coquinas do campo de Bu zios, Bacia de Santos. Dissertac a o. Universidade Federal do Parana , p. 234. https hdl.handle. net 1884 74925. Apel, J.R., 2002. Oceanic internal waves and solitons. In Jackson, C.R. Ed. , An Atlas of Internal Solitary-like Waves and Their Properties. Global Ocean Associates, vol. 1. Prepared for Office of Naval Research Code 322 PO, Alexandria, VA, pp. 1 40. Arau jo, C.C., Madrucci, V., Homewood, P., Mettraux, M., Ramnani, C.W., Spadini, A.R., 2022. Stratigraphic and sedimentary constraints on presalt carbonate reservoirs of the South Atlantic Margin, Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. AAPG Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull. 106 12 , 2513 2546. https doi.org 10.1306 08082219218. Arienti, L.M., Souza, R.S., Viana, S., Cuglieri, M.A., Silva, R.P., Tonietto, S., Paula, L., Gil, J.A., 2018. Facies association, depositional systems, and paleophysiographic models of the Barra Velha Formation, pre-salt sequence Santos Basin, Brazil. In AAPG Annual Convention Exhibition 2018. Salt Lake City, Utah. Armelenti, G., Goldberg, K., Kuchle, J., De Ros, L.F., 2016. Deposition, diagenesis and reservoir potential of non-carbonate sedimentary rocks from the rift section of Fig. 16. Schematic representation of multicycle redeposition. A Reworked ooids with abraded and abraded envelopes previously replaced by calcite. B Representation of multiple cyclic grains. Reworked ooid is incorporated within intraclast later enveloped and experiencing a new reworking. C Intraclast enveloped as the nucleus of an ooid, subsequently reworked, as a new intra clast. D Blend of two distinct processes in the same grain, e.g., with microbial intraclast as nucleus for abiotic spherulitic precipitation, later eroded and forming new intraclast. generating intraclastic levels with multicyclic characteristics, often intercalated with in situ deposits. Considering the importance of pre-salt intraclastic deposits as res ervoirs, further investigation of the processes responsible for their formation is of key importance. Understanding these processes will 20 S.D. Altenhofen et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 Campos Basin, Brazil. Petrol. Geosci. 22 3 , 223 239. https doi.org 10.1144 petgeo2015-035. Azere do, A.C., Duarte, L.v., Silva, A.P., 2021. The challenging carbonates from the PreSalt reservoirs offshore Brazil facies, palaeoenvironment and diagenesis. J. S. Am. Earth Sci. 108 103202 , 23. https doi.org 10.1016 j.jsames.2021.103202. Ba denas, B., Pomar, L., Aurell, M., Morsilli, M., 2012. A facies model for internalites internal wave deposits on a gently sloping carbonate ramp Upper Jurassic, Ricla, NE Spain . Sediment. Geol. 271 272, 44 57. https doi.org 10.1016 j. sedgeo.2012.05.020. Barnett, A.J., Fu, L., Rapasi, T., Scotellaro, C., Guha, J., Cabolova, A., Domingues, A.L., 2020. In Seismic Characterization and Origin of Clinoforms in Lacustrine Depositional Environments A Case Study from the Cretaceous of the South Atlantic, vol. 509. Geological Society Special Publication, pp. 127 145. https doi.org 10.1144 SP509-2019-148. Barnett, A.J., Obermaier, M., Amthor, J., Juk, K., Camara, R., Sharafodin, M., Bolton, M., 2018. Origin and significance of thick carbonate grainstone packages in non-marine successions a case study from the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin. AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition. AAPG Search and Discovery Article 11116. Barnett, A.J., Obermaier, M., Amthor, J., Sharafodin, M., Bolton, M., Clarke, D., Camara, R., 2021. Origin and significance of thick carbonate grainstone packages in nonmarine successions a case study from the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazil. In Mello, Marcio R., Yilmaz, Pinar O., Katz, Barry J. Eds. , The Supergiant Lower Cretaceous Pre-salt Petroleum Systems of the Santos Basin, Brazil AAPG Memoir 124, pp. 155 174. Baumgarten, C.S., 1985. Evoluc a o estrutural de Pampo, Badejo e Linguado durante a deposic a o da Formac a o Lagoa Feia. Bol. Tec. Petrobras 28 2 , 91 101. Baumgarten, C.S., Dultra, A.J., Scuta, M.S., Figueiredo, M.V.L., Sequeira, M.F.P., 1988. Coquinas da Formac a o Lagoa Feia, Bacia de Campos evoluc a o da Geologia de Desenvolvimento. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 2 1 , 27 36. Bertani, R., Carozzi, A., 1985. Lagoa Feia formation Lower Cretaceous Campos Basin, offshore Brazil rift valley type lacustrine carbonate reservoirs. J. Petrol. Geol. 8, 199 220. Bizotto, A.C., 2014. Coquinas eoaptianas do sudoeste da Bacia de Campos fa cies deposicionais, eventos diagene ticos e fatores controladores da qualidade do reservato rio - Dissertac a o mestrado , vol. 553. - Universidade Estadual Paulista Instituto de Geocie ncias e Cie ncias Exatas, Rio Claro, SP, p. 282. B625c. Blaich, O.A., Faleide, J.I., Tsikalas, F., 2011. Crustal breakup and continent-ocean transition at South Atlantic conjugate margins. J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 116 1 , 38. https doi.org 10.1029 2010JB007686. B01402. Boyd, A., Souza, A., Carneiro, G., Machado, V., Trevizan, W., Santos, B., Netto, P., Bagueira, R., Polinski, R., Bertolini, A., 2015. Presalt carbonate evaluation for Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. Petrophysics 56 6 , 577 591. Buckley, J.P., Bosence, D., Elders, C., 2015. Tectonic setting and stratigraphic architecture of an early cretaceous lacustrine carbonate platform, sugar Loaf high, Santos Basin, Brazil. Geological Society Special Publication 418 1 , 175 191. https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.13. Burgess, P.M., Winefield, P., Minzoni, M., Elders, C., 2013. Methods for identification of isolated carbonate buildups from seismic reflection data. AAPG Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull. 97 7 , 1071 1098. https doi.org 10.1306 12051212011. Camargo, M.M., Chinelatto, G.F., Basso, M., Vidal, A.C., 2022. Electrofacies definition and zonation of the lower cretaceous Barra Velha Formation carbonate reservoir in the pre-salt sequence of the Santos Basin, SE Brazil. J. Petrol. Geol. 45 4 , 439 460. https doi.org 10.1111 jpg.12827. Carramal, N.G., Oliveira, D.M., Cacela, A.S.M., Cuglieri, M.A.A., Rocha, N.P., Viana, S. M., Toledo, S.L.V., Pedrinha, S., De Ros, L.F., 2022. Paleoenvironmental insights from the deposition and diagenesis of Aptian pre-salt magnesium silicates from the Lula field, Santos Basin, Brazil. J. Sediment. Res. 92, 12 31. https doi.org 10.2110 jsr.2020.139. Carlotto, M.A., da Silva, R.C.B., Yamato, A.A., Trindade, W.L., Moreira, J.L.P., Fernandes, R.A.R., Ribeiro, O.J.S., Gouveia, W.P., Carminati, J.P., Qicai, D., Junfeng, Z., da Silva-Telles, A.C., 2017. Libra a newborn giant in the brazilian presalt province. In Merrill, R.K., Sternbach, C.A. Eds. , Giant Fields of the Decade 2000 2010, vol. 113. AAPG Memoir, pp. 165 176. https doi.org 10.1306 13572006M1133685. Carminatti, M., Wolff, B., Gamboa, L., 2008. New exploratory frontiers in Brazil. In Proceedings of the 19th World Petroleum Congress, p. 11. Madrid, Spain. Carvalho, M.D., Mundim Prac a, U., da Silva-Telles Jr., A.C., Jahnert, R.J., Dias, J.L., 2000. Bioclastic carbonate lacustrine facies models in the Campos Basin lower cretaceous , Brazil. In Gierlowski-Kordesch, E.H., Kelts, K.R. Eds. , Lake Basins through Space and Time, AAPG Studies in Geology, vol. 46, pp. 245 256. https doi.org 10.1306 St46706. Carvalho, A.M., Hamon, Y., Gomes, O.S., Silva, N.G.C., Collard, N., 2022. Facies and diagenesis distribution in an Aptian Pre-Salt carbonate reservoir of the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil a comprehensive quantitative approach. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 141, 105708 https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2022.105708. Carvalho, M.D., Fernandes, F.L., 2021. Pre-Salt depositional system sedimentology, diagenesis, and reservoir quality of the Barra Velha Formation as a result of the Santos Basin tectono-stratigraphic development. In Mello, M.R., Pinar, O., Yilmaz, Katz B. Eds. , The Super Giant Petroleum System of the Pre-salt from the Santos Basin, AAPG Memoir 124, pp. 121 154. https doi.org 10.1306 13732337MSB.5.1708. Castro, J.C., 2006. Evoluc a o dos conhecimentos sobre as coquinas- reservato rio da Formac a o Lagoa Feia no trend Badejo-Linguado-Pampo, Bacia de Campos. Geociencias 25 2 , 175 186. Castro, T.M., 2019. Avaliac a o dos Reservato rios Carbona ticos do Pre -Sal no Campo de Bu zios, Bacia de Santos. MSc. Thesis, UFF, Nitero i, RJ, p. 182. Castro, J.C., Azambuja Filho, N.C., Xavier, A.A.P.G., 1981. Fa cies, ana lise estratigra fica e reservato rios da Formac a o Lagoa Feia, Creta ceo Inferior da Bacia de Campos. Rio de Janeiro PETROBRA S-CENPES-LABOR, Relato rio Interno. Castro, T.M., Lupinacci, W.M., 2019. Evaluation of fine-grains in pre-salt reservoirs. In Proceedings of the 16th International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society Expogef, vols. 1 6. Brazilian Geophysical Society. https doi.org 10.22564 16cisbgf2019.299. Castro, T.M. de, Lupinacci, W.M., 2022. Comparison between conventional and NMR approaches for formation evaluation of pre salt interval in the Buzios Field, Santos Basin, Brazil. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 208, 109679 https doi.org 10.1016 j. petrol.2021.109679. Part D. Chaboureau, A.C., Guillocheau, F., Robin, C., Rohais, S., Moulin, M., Aslanian, D., 2013. Paleogeographic evolution of the central segment of the South Atlantic during Early Cretaceous times Paleotopographic and geodynamic implications. Tectonophysics 604, 191 223. https doi.org 10.1016 j.tecto.2012.08.025. Chafetz, H.S., Butler, J.C., 1980. Petrology of recent caliche pisolites, spherulites and speleothem deposits from central Texas. Sedimentology 27, 497 518. Chafetz, H., Barth, J., Cook, M., Guo, X., Zhou, J., 2018. Origins of carbonate spherulites implications for Brazilian Aptian pre-salt reservoir. Sediment. Geol. 365, 21 33. https doi.org 10.1016 j.sedgeo.2017.12.024. Chahi, A., Fritz, B., Duplay, J., Weber, F., Lucas, J., 1997. Textural transition and genetic relationship between precursor stevensite and sepiolite in lacustrine sediments Jbel Rhassoul, Morocco . Clay Clay Miner. 45, 378 389. Chinelatto, G.F., Belila, A.M.P., Basso, M., Souza, J.P.P., Vidal, A.C., 2020. A taphofacies interpretation of shell concentrations and their relationship with petrophysics a case study of Barremian-Aptian coquinas in the Itapema Formation, Santos Basin-Brazil. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 116, 21. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2020.104317, 104317. Choquette, P.W., Pray, Ll C., 1970. Geologic Nomenclature and classification of porosity in sedimentary carbonates. AAPG Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull. 54 2 , 2017 2250. Contreras, J., Zu hlke, R., Bowman, S., Bechsta dt, T., 2010. Seismic stratigraphy and subsidence analysis of the southern Brazilian margin Campos, Santos and Pelotas basins . Mar. Petrol. Geol. 27, 1952 1980. https doi.org 10.1016 j. marpetgeo.2010.06.007. Corre a, C.R.A., 2016. Controles estratigra ficos e predic a o da parage nese diagene tica dos carbonatos lacustres da Formac a o Coqueiros nos campos de Badejo, Trilha, Linguado e Pampo, Aptiano da Bacia de Campos RJ , Dissertac a o de Mestrado. Instituto de Geocie ncias, Universidade de Sa o Paulo, Sa o Paulo. Della Porta, G., 2015. Carbonate build-ups in lacustrine, hydrothermal and fluvial settings comparing depositional geometry, fabric types and geochemical signature. In Bosence, D.W.J., Gibbons, K.A., Le Heron, D.P., Morgan, W.A., Pritchard, T., Vining, B.A. Eds. , Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production, vol. 418. Geological Society of London, Special Publication, pp. 17 68. https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.4. Da Silva, M.D., Gomes, M.E.B., Mexias, A.S., Pozo, M., Drago, S.M., Ce lia, R.S., Silva, L.A. C., Netto, P., Gomes, L.B., Porcher, C.C., et al., 2021. Mineralogical study of levels with magnesian clay minerals in the Santos Basin, Aptian pre-salt Brazil. Minerals 11 9 , 970. https doi.org 10.3390 min11090970, 2021. De Ros, L.F., Goldberg, K., Abel, M., Victorinetti, F., Mastella, L., Castro, E., 2007. Advanced Acquisition and Management of Petrographic Information from Reservoir Rocks Using the PETROLEDGE System. AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition. April 1-4. De Ros, L.F., Oliveira, D.M., 2023. An operational classification system for the South Atlantic Pre-Salt rocks. J. Sediment. Res. 93, 13. https doi.org 10.2110 jsr.2022.103. De Wet, C.B., Mora, C.I., Gore, P.J.W., Gierlowski-Kordesch, E., Cucolo, S.J., 2002. Deposition and geochemistry of lacustrine and spring carbonates in Mesozoic rift basins, eastern North America. In Ashley, G.M., Renaut, R.W. Eds. , Sedimentation in Continental Rifts, vol. 73. SEPM Special Publication, pp. 309 325. https doi. org 10.2110 pec.02.73.0309. Dias, J.L., Oliveira, J.Q., Vieira, J.C., 1988. Sedimentological and stratigraphic analysis of the Lagoa Feia Formation, rift phase of Campos basin, offshore Brazil. Rev. Bras. Geociencias 18, 252 260. Dias, J.L., 2005. Tecto nica, estratigrafia e sedimentac a o no Andar Aptiano da margem leste brasileira. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 13, 7 25. Dias, R.M., Castro, T.M., Santos, M.A.C., Lupinacci, W.M., 2019. Understanding the relationship between acoustic impedance and porosity in the pre salt of the Buzios Field, Santos Basin. In First EAGE Workshop on Pre-salt Reservoir from Exploration to Production. European Association of Geoscientists Engineers, pp. 1 5. https doi.org 10.3997 2214-4609.201982009. Dickson, J.A.D., 1965. A Modified staining technique for carbonates in thin section. Nature 205 4971 . https doi.org 10.1038 205587a0. Erthal, M., Carvalho, F.S., Falca o, L.C., Gonc alvez Jr., O.M., Silva, A.P., 2022. Subaerial Travertine Facies A Pre-salt Oasis. Third EAGE Conference on Pre Salt Reservoirs, Rio de Janeiro, Nov. 2022. European Association of Geoscientists Engineers, p. 5. https doi.org 10.3997 2214-4609.202288026. Esteban, M., Klappa, C.F., 1983. Subaerial exposure environment. In Scholle, P.A., Bebout, D.G., Moore, C.H. Eds. , Carbonate Depositional Environments, AAPG Memoir, vol. 33. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa, Okla, USA, pp. 1 54. Farias, F., Szatmari, P., Bahniuk, A., Franc a, A.B., 2019. Evaporitic carbonates in the presalt of Santos Basin genesis and tectonic implications. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 105, 251 272. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2019.04.020. Ferreira, D.J.A., Lupinacci, W.M., Castro, T.M., Casado, N.L., Alvarenga, M., Bezerra, Y., Caparica Jr., J.F., Santos, M.A.C., 2019a. Neural Network Unsupervised Classification as an Advanced Pre Salt Reservoir Characterization Technique a 21 S.D. Altenhofen et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 Buzios Field Case Study, vol. 2019. 16th International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society, SBGf, Rio de Janeiro, p. 6. Ferreira, D.J.A., Lupinacci, W.M., Neves, I.A., Zambrini, J.P.R., Ferrari, A.L., Gamboa, L. A.P., Olho Azul, M., 2019b. Unsupervised seismic facies classification applied to a presalt carbonate reservoir, Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. AAPG Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull. 103 4 , 997 1012. https doi.org 10.1306 10261818055. Ferreira, D.J.A., Dutra, H.P.L., de Castro, T.M., Lupinacci, W.M., 2021a. Geological process modeling and geostatistics for facies reconstruction of presalt carbonates. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 124, 104828 https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2020.104828. Ferreira, D.J.A., Dias, R.M., Lupinacci, W.M., 2021b. Seismic pattern classification integrated with permeability-porosity evaluation for reservoir characterization of presalt carbonates in the Buzios Field, Brazil. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 201, 108441 https doi.org 10.1016 j.petrol.2021.108441. Flu gel, E., 2004. Microfacies of Carbonate Rocks Analysis, Interpretation, and Application. Springer, New York, p. 976p. Formigli, J.M., Almeida, A.S., Pinto, A.C.C., 2009. Santos Basin s pre-salt reservoirs development the Way ahead. In Offshore Technology Conference. Houston USA. Fouke, B.W., 2011. Hot-spring systems Geobiology abiotic and biotic influences on travertine formation at Mammoth Hot springs, Yellowstone National Park, USA. Sedimentology 58, 170 219. https doi.org 10.1111 j.1365-3091.2010.01209.x. Gamboa, L.A.P., Pinheiro Machado, M.A., Silveira, D.P., Freitas, J.T.R., Silva, R.P., 2009. Evaporitos estratificados no Atla ntico Sul Interpretac a o si smica e controle tectonoestratigrafico na Bacia de Santos. In Mohriak, W., Szatmari, P., Anjos, S.M.C. Eds. , Sal, Geologia e Tectonica. Exemplos nas Bacias Brasileiras. Beca, Sao Paulo, pp. 343 361. Gandin, A., Capezzuoli, E., 2008. Travertine versus calcareous tufa Distinctive petrologic features and stable isotopes signatures. Italian Journal of Quaternary Sciences 21 1B , 125 136. Gierlowski-Kordesch, E.H., 2010. Lacustrine carbonates. In Alonso-Zarza, A.M., Tanner, L.H. Eds. , Carbonates in Continental Settings, Developments in Sedimentology, vol. 61, pp. 1 101. https doi.org 10.1016 S0070-4571 09 061019. Goldberg, K., Kuchle, J., Scherer, C., Alvarenga, R., Ene, P.L., Armelenti, G., de Ros, L.F., 2017. Re-sedimented deposits in the rift section of the Campos Basin. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 80, 412 431. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2016.11.022. Gomes, J.P., Bunevich, R.B., Tedeschi, L.R., Tucker, M.E., Whitaker, F.F., 2020. Facies classification and patterns of lacustrine carbonate deposition of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazilian pre-salt. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 113 https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2019.104176. Gomes, P.O., Kilsdonk, B., Grow, T., Minken, J., Barragan, R., 2012. Tectonic evolution of the outer high of Santos Basin, Southern Sa o Paulo Plateau, Brazil, and implications for hydrocarbon exploration. In AAPG Memoir. https doi.org 10.1306 13351550M1003530 Issue 100 . Gomes, P.O., Kilsdonk, W., Minken, J., Grow, T., Barragan, R., 2009. The outer high of the Santos Basin, southern Sa o Paulo plateau, Brazil pre-salt exploration Outbreak, Paleogeographic setting, and evolution of the Syn-rift structures. Search and Discovery Article 10193. In Adapted from Oral Presentation at AAPG International Conference and Exhibition, vol. 2008. Cape Town, South Africa, October 26-29. Gordon, A.C., Mohriak, W.U., Stanton, N., Santos, A.C., 2022. Magmatic cycles in Santos Basin S.E. Brazil tectonic control in the temporal-spatial distribution and geophysical signature. J. S. Am. Earth Sci. 121, 32. https doi.org 10.1016 j. jsames.2022.104111, 104111. Grotzinger, J.P., Knoll, A.H., 1999. Stromatolites in Precambrian carbonates evolutionary mileposts or environmental dipsticks Annu. Rev. Earth Pl. Sc. 27, 313 358. Guardado, L.R., Spadini, A.R., Brandao, J.S.L., Mello, M.R., 2000. Petroleum system of the campos Basin. Brazil. Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Memoir 73, 317 324. Harris, N.B., Sorriaux, P., Toomey, D.F., 1994. Geology of the lower cretaceous Viodo carbonate, Congo basin a lacustrine carbonate in the South Atlantic rift. In Lomando, A.J., Schreiber, B.C., Harris, P.M. Eds. , Lacustrine Reservoirs and Depositional Systems SEPM Core Workshop, vol. 19, pp. 143 172. https doi.org 10.2110 cor.94.01.0143. Harris, N.B., 2000. Toca Carbonate, Congo Basin response to an evolving rift lake. In Mello, M.R., Katz, B.J. Eds. , Petroleum Systems of South Atlantic Margins AAPG Memoir 73, pp. 341 360. https doi.org 10.1306 M73705C24. Herlinger Jr., R., Freitas, G.N., Anjos, C.W., De Ros, L.F., 2020. Petrological and petrophysical implications of magnesian clays in Brazilian Pre-Salt deposits. SPWLA 61st Annual Logging Symposium 13. https doi.org 10.30632 SPWLA-5004. June 24 to July 29, 2020. Herlinger, R., Zambonato, E.E., de Ros, L.F., 2017. Influence of diagenesis on the quality of lower cretaceous Pre-Salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs from northern Campos Basin, Offshore Brazil. J. Sediment. Res. 87 12 , 1285 1313. https doi.org 10.2110 jsr.2017.70. Hodgson, W.A., 1968. The diagenesis of spherulitic carbonate concretions and other rocks from Mangakahia Group sediments, Kaipara Harbour, New Zealand. J. Sediment. Petrol. 38 4 , 1254 1263. Horschutz, P., Scuta, M., 1992. Fa cies-perfis e mapeamento de qualidade do reservato rio de coquinas da Formac a o Lagoa Feia do Campo de Pampo. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 6 1 2 , 45 58. Hunt, D., 2021. The Bacalhau field new insights into lacustrine carbonate platform development, Santos Basin, Brazil. Second EAGE Conference on pre-salt reservoir. From Exploration to Production 4, 8-10 September 2021. Karner, G.D., Gambo a, L.A.P., 2007. Timing and Origin of the South Atlantic Pre-salt Sag Basins and Their Capping Evaporites, vol. 285. Geological Society Special Publication. https doi.org 10.1144 SP285.2. Kattah, S., 2017. Exploration Opportunities in the pre-salt Play, Deepwater Campos Basin, Brazil. Sediment. Rec. 4 8. https doi.org 10.2110 sedred.2017.1.4. Kendall, A.C., 1977. Fascicular optic calcite a replacement of bundled acicular carbonate sediments. J. Sediment. Petrol. 47, 1056 1062. https doi.org 10.1111 j.1365-3091.1973.tb01616.x. Kirkham, A., Tucker, M.E., 2018. Thrombolites, spherulites and fibrous crusts Holkerian, Purbeckian, Aptian context, fabrics and origins. Sediment. Geol. 374, 69 84. https doi.org 10.1016 j.sedgeo.2018.07.002. Lebre, M.B.S., 2019. Comparac a o de Metodologias para Estimativa de Propriedades de Reservato rio Aplicadas nos Carbonatos do Pre -Sal do Campo de Bu zios, Bacia de Santos. Graduation Thesis, UFF, Niteroi, RJ, p. 94. Leite, C.O.N., Silva, C.M.A., De Ros, L.F., 2020. Depositional and diagenetic processes in the Pre-Salt rift section of a Santos Basin area, SE Brazil. J. Sediment. Res. 90, 584 608. https doi.org 10.2110 jsr.2020.27. Lentini, M.R., Fraser, S.I., Sumner, H.S., Davies, R.J., 2010. Geodynamics of the central South Atlantic conjugate margins implications for hydrocarbon potential. Petrol. Geosci. 16, 217 229. https doi.org 10.1144 1354-079309-909. Lima, B.E.M., De Ros, L.F., 2019. Deposition, diagenetic and hydrothermal processes in the Aptian Pre-Salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs of the northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Sediment. Geol. 383, 55 81. https doi.org 10.1016 j. sedgeo.2019.01.006. Lima, B.E.M., Tedeschi, L.R., Pestilho, A.L.S., Santos, R.V., Vazquez, J.C., Guzzo, J.V.P., De Ros, L.F., 2020. Deep-burial hydrothermal alteration of the Pre-Salt carbonate reservoirs from northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil evidence from petrography, fluid inclusions, Sr, C and O isotopes. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 113, 104143 https doi. org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2019.104143. Macedo, P.H.C., Barretto, D.R., Abrantes Jr., F.R., Neves, I.A., Lupinacci, W.M., 2021a. Application of seismic architecture interpretation in Pre-Salt carbonate reservoirs of the Buzios Field, Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. Brazilian Journal of Geophysics 39 3 , 435 447. https doi.org 10.22564 rbgf.v39i3.2110. Macedo, P.H.C., Barretto, D.R., Neves, I.A., Abrantes Jr., F.R., Lupinacci, W.M., 2021b. Seismic Interpretation of Presalt Carbonate Reservoirs of the Bu zios Field. Santos Basin. 17th International Congress of the Brazilian Geophysical Society held in Rio de Janeiro, p. 6. Brazil,16-19 August 2021. Mello, V. L. de, Lupinacci, W.M., 2022. Mineralogy based classification of carbonate rocks using elastic parameters a case study from Buzios Field. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 209, 109962 https doi.org 10.1016 j.petrol.2021.109962. Mendes, L. de C., Correia, U.M.C., Cunha, O.R., Oliveira, F.M., Vidal, A.C., 2022. Topological analysis of fault network in naturally fractured reservoirs a case study from the Pre-Salt section of the Santos Basin, Brazil. J. Struct. Geol. 159, 104597 https doi.org 10.1016 j.jsg.2022.104597. Mercedes-Marti n, R., Brasier, A.T., Rogerson, M., Reijmer, J.J.G., Vonhof, H., Pedley, M., 2017. A depositional model for spherulitic carbonates associated with alkaline, volcanic lakes. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 86, 168 191. https doi.org 10.1016 j. marpetgeo.2017.05.032. Milani, E.J., Rangel, H.D., Bueno, G.V., Stica, J.M., Winter, W.R., Caixeta, J.M., da Cruz Pessoa Neto, O., 2007. Bacias sedimentares brasileiras - Cartas estratigra ficas. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 15 2 , 183 205. Minzoni, M., Cantelli, A., Thornton, J., Wignall, B., 2020. In BrazilFrom, Hendry, J., Burgess, P., Hunt, D., Janson, X., Zampetti, V. Eds. , Seismic-scale Geometries and Sequence-Stratigraphic Architecture of Early Cretaceous Syn-Post Rift Carbonate Systems, Presalt Section, Seismic Characterization of Carbonate Platforms and Reservoirs, vol. 509. Geological Society, London, Special Publication, p. 22. https doi.org 10.1144 SP509-2019-78. Mizuno, T.A., Mizusaki, A.M.P., Lykawka, R., 2018. Facies and paleoenvironments of the Coqueiros Formation Lower Cretaceous, Campos Basin a high frequency stratigraphic model to support Pre-Salt coquinas reservoir development in the Brazilian continental margin. J. S. Am. Earth Sci. 88, 107 117. https doi.org 10.1016 j.jsames.2018.07.007. Moreira, J.L.P., Madeira, C.V., Gil, J.A., Machado, M.A.P., 2007. Bacia de Santos. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 15 2 , 531 549. Morsilli, M., Pomar, L., 2012. Insight into the origin of hummocky cross-stratification HCS the role of internal waves IWs . Terra. Nova 24, 273 282. Muniz, M.C., 2013. Tectono-Stratigraphic Evolution of the Barremian-Aptian Continental Rift Carbonates in Southern Campos Basin, Brazil. PhD Thesis. Royal Holloway University of London. Muniz, M.C., Bosence, D.W.J., 2015. Pre-Salt microbialites from the Campos Basin offshore Brazil image log facies, facies model and cyclicity in lacustrine carbonates. Geological Society Special Publication 418 1 . https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.10. Muniz, M.C., Bosence, D.W.J., 2017. Reservoir layering controlled by the taphonomy and taphofacies of coquinas from the early Aptian Campos Basin, Brazil. In Conference AAPG ICE 2017. London, UK. Muniz, M.C., Bosence, D.W.J., 2018. Lacustrine carbonate platforms facies, cycles, and tectonosedimentary models for the presalt Lagoa Feia Group lower cretaceous , Campos Basin, Brazil. AAPG Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull. 102 12 , 2569 2597. https doi.org 10.1306 0511181620617087. Munk, W., 1981. Internal waves and small-scale processes. In Warren, B.A., Wunsch, C. Eds. , Evolution of Physical Oceanography. MIT Press, Cambridge, pp. 264 291. Netto, P.R.A., Pozo, M., da Silva, M.D., Gomes, M.E.B., Mexias, A., Ramnani, C.W., Parizek-Silva, Y., Borghi, L., Rios-Netto, A.M., 2022. Paleoenvironmental implications of authigenic magnesian clay formation sequences in the Barra Velha Formation Santos Basin, Brazil . Minerals 12, 200. https doi.org 10.3390 min12020200. Oliveira, L.C., Rancan, C.C., Sartorato, A.C.L., Farias, F.A., Pereira, E., 2021. Drowning unconformities on presalt carbonate platforms Examples from the Itapema 22 S.D. Altenhofen et al. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 138 2024 104863 Schroeder, J.H., 1972. Fabrics and sequences of submarine carbonate sequences in Holocene Bermuda cup reefs. Geologisches Rundschau 61, 708 730. Sommer, V.P., Kuchle, J., De Ros, L.F., 2022. Seismic stratigraphic framework and seismic facies of the Aptian pre-salt Barra Velha Formation in the Tupi field, Santos Basin, Brazil. J. S. Am. Earth Sci. 118 103947 , 13. https doi.org 10.1016 j. jsames.2022.103947. Szatmari, P., Guerra, M.C.M., Pequeno, M.A., 1996. Genesis of Large Counter-regional Normal Fault by Flow of Cretaceous Salt in the South Atlantic Santos Basin, Brazil, vol. 100. Geological Society Special Publication. https doi.org 10.1144 GSL. SP.1996.100.01.16. Szatmari, P., Milani, E.J., 2016. Tectonic control of the oil-rich large igneous-carbonatesalt province of the South Atlantic rift. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 77, 567 596. https doi. org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2016.06.004. Tavares dos Santos, P., Gordon, A.C., 2021. Bu zios field geological setting of the largest Pre-Salt field, Santos Basin, Brazil. In Mello, Marcio R., Yilmaz, Pinar O., Katz, Barry J. Eds. , The Supergiant Lower Cretaceous Pre-salt Petroleum Systems of the Santos Basin, Brazil AAPG Memoir 124, pp. 375 394. https doi.org 10.1306 13722365MSB.14.1853. Terra, G.J.S., Spadini, A.R., Franc a, A.B., Sombra, C.L., Zambonato, E.E., da Silva Juschaks, L.C., Arienti, L.M., Erthal, M.M., Blauth, M., Franco, M.P., Matsuda, N.S., Carramal da Silva, N.G., Moretti Ju nior, P.A., D Avila, R.S.F., Schiffer de Souza, R., Tonietto, S.N., Couto dos Anjos, S.M., Campinho, V.S., Winter, W.R., et al., 2010. Carbonate rock classification applied to brazilian sedimentary basins. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 18 1 . Thompson, D.L., Stilwell, J.D., Hall, M., 2015. Lacustrine carbonate reservoirs from early cretaceous rift lakes of Western Gondwana pre-salt coquinas of Brazil and West Africa. In Gondwana Research, vol. 28. Elsevier Inc, pp. 26 51. https doi.org 10.1016 j.gr.2014.12.005. Issue 1. Tonietto, S.N., Gomes, J.P.B., Bunevich, R.B., Erthal, M.M., 2023. Spherulitestone as a Transitional Facies Responding to Lake Level Variation Diagenetic or Depositional , vol. 2023. AAPG - IMAGE, Houston, TX, USA. Tosca, N.J., Wright, V.P., 2015. Diagenetic pathways linked to labile Mg-clays in lacustrine carbonate reservoirs a model for the origin of secondary porosity in the Cretaceous pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, offshore Brazil. In Armitage, P.J., Butcher, A.R., Churchill, J.M., Csoma, A.E., Hollis, C., Lander, R.H., Omma, J.E., Worden, R.H. Eds. , Reservoir Quality of Clastic and Carbonate Rocks Analysis, Modelling and Prediction, vol. 435. Geological Society of London, Special Publication, pp. 33 46. https doi.org 10.1144 SP435.1, 1. Tosca, N.J., Wright, V.P., 2018. Diagenetic Pathways Linked to Labile Mg-Clays in Lacustrine Carbonate Reservoirs A Model for the Origin of Secondary Porosity in the Cretaceous Pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, Offshore Brazil, vol. 435. Geological Society Special Publication. https doi.org 10.1144 SP435.1. Issue 1. Tucker, M.E., Wright, V.P., 1990. Carbonate Sedimentology. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford, p. 482. Verrecchia, E.P., Freytet, P., Verrecchia, K.E., Dumont, J.L., 1995. Spherulites in Quaternary calcrete laminar crusts biogenic CaCO3 precipitations as a major contributor to crust formation. J. Sediment. Res. 65, 690 700. Virgone, A., Gaucher, E., Teboul, P.-A., Kolodka, C., Poli, E., 2021. A discussion on South Atlantic Pre-Salt continental carbonates a mosaic of sedimentary facies and processes. In Mello, M.R., Yilmaz, P.O., Katz, B.J. Eds. , The Supergiant Lower Cretaceous Pre-salt Petroleum Systems of the Santos Basin, Brazil AAPG Memoir 124. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa, Okla, USA, pp. 193 214. https doi.org 10.1306 13722320MSB.8.1853. Wright, V.P., 2022. The mantle, CO2 and the giant Aptian chemogenic lacustrine carbonate factory of the South Atlantic some carbonates are made, not born. Sedimentology 69, 47 73. https doi.org 10.1111 sed.12835. Wright, P., Rodriguez, K., 2018. Reinterpreting the South Atlantic Pre-Salt Microbialite reservoirs petrographic, isotopic and seismic evidence for a shallow evaporitic lake depositional model. First Break 36 5 . https doi.org 10.3997 1365-2397.n0094. Wright, P., Tosca, N.J., 2016. A Geochemical Model for the Formation of the Pre-salt Reservoirs, Santos Basin, Brazil Implications for Understanding Reservoir Distribution. AAPG Annual Convention and Ehibition, p. 51304. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2015. An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates. Geological Society Special Publication 418 1 . https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.3. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2017. Critically evaluating the current depositional models for the pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, offshore Brazil. AAPG Search and Discovery. Article 51439. In Adapted from Keynote Address Given at AAPG SEG International Conference and Exhibition, p. 40. London, England, October 15-18, 2017. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2020. The textural evolution and ghost matrices of the Cretaceous Barra Velha Formation carbonates from the Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. Facies 66 1 . https doi.org 10.1007 s10347-019-0591-2. Zuffa, G.G., 1980. Hybrid arenites their composition and classification. J. Sediment. Petrol. 50 1 , 21 29. https doi.org 10.1306 212f7950-2b24-11d78648000102c1865d. Formation lower cretaceous , Santos Basin, offshore Brazil. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 577, 110570. https doi.org 10.1016 j. palaeo.2021.110570. Oliveira, V.C.B., Silva, C.M.A., Borghi, L.F., Carvalho, I.S., 2019. Lacustrine coquinas and hybrid deposits from rift phase pre-Salt, lower Cretaceous, Campos Basin, Brazil. J. S. Am. Earth Sci. 95, 102254 https doi.org 10.1016 j.jsames.2019.102254. Olivito, J.P.R., Souza, F.J., 2020. Depositional model of early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonate reservoirs of the Coqueiros formation-Northern Campos Basin, southeastern Brazil. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 111, 414 439. https doi.org 10.1016 j. marpetgeo.2019.07.013. Pettijohn, F.J., 1975. Sedimentary Rocks, third ed. Harper and Row, New York, p. 628. Pietzsch, R., Oliveira, D.M., Tedeschi, L.R., Queiroz Neto, J.v., Figueiredo, M.F., Vazquez, J.C., de Souza, R.S., 2018. Palaeohydrology of the lower cretaceous pre-salt lacustrine system, from rift to post-rift phase, Santos Basin, Brazil. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 507, 60 80. https doi.org 10.1016 j. palaeo.2018.06.043. Pietzsch, R., Tedeschi, L.R., Oliveira, D.M., dos Anjos, C.W.D., Vazquez, J.C., Figueiredo, M.F., 2020. Environmental conditions of deposition of the Lower Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin Brazil , based on stable carbon and oxygen isotopes a continental record of pCO2 during the onset of the Oceanic Anoxic Event 1a OAE 1a interval Chem. Geol. 535, 119457 https doi.org 10.1016 j.chemgeo.2019.119457. Playton, T.E., Jason, X., Kerans, C., 2010. Carbonate slopes. In James, N.P., Dalrymple, R.W. Eds. , Facies Models, 4. John s GAC Geological Association of Canada, St, pp. 449 476. Pomar, L., Morsilli, M., Hallock, P., Ba denas, B., 2012. Internal waves, an under-explored source of turbulence events in the sedimentary record. Earth Sci. Rev. 111 1 2 , 56 81. https doi.org 10.1016 j.earscirev.2011.12.005. Pomar, L., Haq, B.U., 2016. Decoding depositional sequences in carbonate systems concepts vs experience. Glob. Planet. Change 146, 190 225. https doi.org 10.1016 j.gloplacha.2016.10.001. Pozo, M., Calvo, J.P., 2018. An overview of authigenic magnesian clays. Minerals 8 11 , 1 22. https doi.org 10.3390 min8110520. Railsback, L.B., Layou, K.M., Heim, N.A., Holland, S.M., Trogdon, M.L., Jarrett, M.B., Izsak, G.M., Bulger, D.E., Wysong, E.J., Trubee, K.J., Fiser, J.M., Cox, J.E., Crowe, D. E., 2012. Geochemical evidence for meteoric diagenesis and cryptic surfaces of subaerial exposure in Upper Ordovician peritidal carbonates from the Nashville Dome, central Tennessee, USA. In Morad, S., Ketzer, J.M., De Ros, L.F. Eds. , Linking Diagenesis to Sequence Stratigraphy, IAS Special Publication 45, International Association of Sedimentologists. Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 257 270. https doi.org 10.1002 9781118485347.ch11. Rangel, H.D., Carminatti, M., 2000. Rift lake stratigraphy of the Lagoa Feia formation, Campos Basin, Brazil. In Gierlowski-Kordesch, E.H., Kelts, K.R. Eds. , Lake Basins through Space and Time, American Association of Petroleum Geology Studies in Geology, vol. 46, pp. 225 244. Rebelo, T.B., Batezelli, A., Mattos, N.H.S., Leite, E.P., 2022. Flow units in complex carbonate reservoirs a study case of the Brazilian pre-salt. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 140, 21. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2022.105639, 105639. Rehim, H.A.A.A., Pimentel, A.M., Carvalho, M.D., Monteiro, M., 1986. Talco e estevensita na Formac a o Lagoa Feia da Bacia de Campos possi veis implicac o es no ambiente deposicional. Brazilian Congress of Geology 34, 416 425. Goiania, Annals 1. Rezende, M.F., Pope, M.C., 2015. Importance of depositional texture in pore characterization of subsalt microbialite carbonates, offshore Brazil. Geological Society Special Publication 418 1 . https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.2. Rocha, L., Favoreto, J., Borghi, L., 2021. Coquinas da Formac a o Itapema, Campo de Mero Pre -sal da Bacia de Santos . Ana lise de Microfa cies e Paleoambiente Deposicional. Anua rio do Instituto de Geocie ncias 44, 39883. https doi.org 10.11137 19823908 2021 44 39883. Rodri guez-Berriguete, A., Dal Bo, P.F., Valle, B., Borghi, L., 2022. When distinction matters carbonate shrubs from the Aptian Barra Velha Formation of Brazilian s presalt. Sediment. Geol. 440, 106236 https doi.org 10.1016 j.sedgeo.2022.106236. ISSN 0037-0738. Sabato Ceraldi, T.S., Green, D., 2017. Evolution of the South Atlantic lacustrine deposits in response to Early Cretaceous rifting, subsidence and lake hydrology. Geological Society Special Publication 438 1 , 77 98. https doi.org 10.1144 SP438.10. Saller, A., Rushton, S., Buambua, L., Inman, K., Mcneil, R., Dickson, J.A.D., 2016. PreSalt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola. AAPG Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull. 100, 1135 1164. https doi.org 10.1306 02111615216. Schaller, H., Terra, G.J.S., Cruz, C.E.S., Spadini, A.R., 1981. Estudo preliminar dos reservato rios da Formac a o Lagoa Feia, a rea de Badejo Pampo, Bacia de Campos. Petrobras, Rio de Janeiro Relato rio interno . Scholle, P.A., Ulmer-Scholle, D.S., 2003. A Color Guide to the Petrography of Carbonate Rocks Grains, Textures, Porosity, Diagenesis, vol. 77. AAPG Memoir, p. 451. 23

[END_OF_PAPER]

Marine and Petroleum Geology 113 2020 104176 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Marine and Petroleum Geology journal homepage www.elsevier.com locate marpetgeo Research paper Facies classification and patterns of lacustrine carbonate deposition of the Barra Velha Formation, Santos Basin, Brazilian Pre-salt T J.P. Gomesa,b, , R.B. Bunevichb, L.R. Tedeschib, M.E. Tuckera, F.F. Whitakera a b School of Earth Sciences, University of Bristol, Queens Road, Bristol BS8 1RJ, England, UK Reservoir Team, Petrobras S. A., Centro Empresarial Senado, 7, andar, Torre B, Avenida Henrique Valadares, 28, Centro, Rio de Janeiro, 20231-030, Brazil A R T I C LE I N FO A B S T R A C T Keywords Facies classification Pre-salt deposits Lacustrine carbonate Spherulites Shrubs The lacustrine carbonate rocks of the giant Pre-salt oil-fields in the Santos and Campos Basins differ in a number of important aspects from classic lake deposits. Prior work has described distinctive and unusual features of deposition, early diagenesis and reservoir quality with in these rocks that defy classification using established schemes. In addition to their unusual textures, debate continues as to how to interpret the vertical stacking pattern of facies. A new facies classification scheme is proposed based on the relative abundance of three endmember components mud micrite and clay minerals , calcite spherulites and fascicular calcite shrubs. Although focused on the main textural and mineralogical features of the rocks as seen today, the proposed scheme takes into account the relative contribution of depositional and early diagenetic components, sediment mineralogy and the degree of dissolution. Application of this scheme offers insight into depositional conditions, whilst also linking to reservoir quality. Basic elementary cycles can be defined using this classification in combination with the variation in the abundance of detrital grains and the chemical composition. Three possible models are suggested to interpret the origin of the basic cycle within the Barra Velha Formation in the context of variation in climate, lake level and water chemistry. Integration of data from different sources, including petrographic, core description and chemical data for the basic cycle, offers improved process-based understanding of metre-scale facies patterns and provides a foundation for understanding larger scale vertical variations within and between unconformity-bound sequences. 1. Introduction matrix micrite versus cement sparite , plus a prefix to indicate the dominant grains present allochems bio-oo- pel- or intra- , to give the limestone a simple descriptive name. The more texturally-based Dunham 1962 classification uses the amount of lime mud and abundance of grains, which reflect the energy level in the environment, to group limestones into four main categories grainstone, packstone, wackestone and mudstone with boundstone for reefal and microbial limestones. To recognize particular types of boundstone within reefal rocks, Embry and Klovan 1971 suggested the terms framestone, bafflestone and boundstone. Similarly, Riding 2000 recognized four types of microbialite stromatolite, thrombolite, dendrite and leiolite. For a limestone dominated by a cement, Wright 1992 proposed the term cementstone. Some of these classifications, originally conceptualized for marine carbonates, have been used for lacustrine deposits with some modifications and variable degrees of success Walker, 1992 . However, the lacustrine carbonate rocks of the giant Pre-salt oil-fields in the Santos and Campos Basins, offshore Brazil, differ in a number of important Geological understanding of carbonate facies has improved over the last few decades, particularly our appreciation of biological and diagenetic processes and their products. A facies classification scheme has four functions Walker, 1992 characterizing a sediment sedimentary rock integrating facts and observations to facilitate interpretation of the environment of deposition providing a norm for purposes of comparison, and acting as a framework to direct further observations. However, the main reason to use a classification, apart from giving a rock a name, is to communicate information concerning the features of a rock. The chosen names may be arbitrary or have some level of overlap with an existing classification, but critically they should be precisely defined to improve the discussion of characterization and interpretation. Following these principles, several classifications for carbonate rocks have been proposed. The genetic classification of limestones introduced by Folk 1959, 1962 is based on the presence or absence of Corresponding author. School of Earth Sciences, University of Bristol, Queens Road, Bristol BS8 1RJ, England, UK. E-mail address jpgomes petrobras.com.br J.P. Gomes . https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2019.104176 Received 25 September 2019 Received in revised form 4 December 2019 Accepted 11 December 2019 Available online 16 December 2019 0264-8172 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license http creativecommons.org licenses BY-NC-ND 4.0 . Marine and Petroleum Geology 113 2020 104176 J.P. Gomes, et al. 2. Geological setting aspects from classic well-documented carbonate lake deposits. 1 The configuration of Cretaceous horsts and grabens generated many islands surrounded by an extensive lake, or many small lakes with variable connectivity through time Pietzsch et al., 2018 . 2 The siliciclastic lake shoreline is located far to the west from the areas of hydrocarbon exploration interest Dias, 2005 . 3 Carbonate deposits appear to be laterally continuous over tens of kilometres Carminatti et al., 2008 . 4 The carbonates are comprised of three main components and detrital material derived from them shrubs, millimetre-scale fibrous laminae and spherulites Wright and Barnett, 2015 . Published articles describing these Pre-salt deposits have tried to fit them within pre-existing facies schemes Wright and Barnett, 2015 Muniz and Bosence, 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2017 Herlinger et al., 2017, Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al., 2017 Arienti et al., 2018 Artaga o, 2018 Sartorato, 2018 Farias et al., 2019 Tanaka et al., 2018 Lima and De Ros, 2019 Wright and Barnett, 2019 . However, this has given rise to a confusing range of terms to describe a single rock fabric. For example, a rock composed of shrub-like calcite crystals has been classified variously as a stromatolite and a thrombolite Terra et al., 2010 Muniz and Bosence, 2015 , as fascicular calcite crust Herlinger et al., 2017 Lima and De Ros, 2019 or as in situ shrubs Wright and Barnett, 2015 or shrub-like facies Farias et al., 2019 . Similarly, rocks composed of spherulites have been classified as spherulite-dominated lithologies Wright and Barnett, 2015 , as Mg-clay with spherulites facies and spherulitite Farias et al., 2019 and as stevensitic claystones with calcite spherulites Lima and De Ros, 2019 . In contrast, the abundant fine-grained facies are widely described as laminites Lima and De Ros, 2019 Muniz and Bosence, 2015 . There has been considerable discussion about the way in which established terminology to describe facies can best be applied in a Pre-salt context. In many cases these terms are associated with distinct paleoenvironmental conditions and or formation processes. There is a clear need for a facies classification scheme based on the proportion of components that characterizes the lacustrine sediments of the Pre-salt and that is distinct from a process-based classification, and thus can help evaluate alternative models of formation. Any such scheme should also allow evaluation of the variability of these components on a micro- and macroscale in order to understand variations through the stratigraphic succession and to allow a proper facies upscaling. Our objective in this paper is to propose a new facies classification scheme in order to document, in a more meaningful manner, the vertical trends in sediment texture and composition for the lacustrine carbonates of the Pre-salt Barra Velha Formation in our area of study of the Santos Basin Fig. 1 . This is based on the textural and mineralogical features of the rocks as seen today, and considers the relative abundance of the three end-member components that are formed in situ mud dolomite, calcite, silica and Mg-clay , calcite spherulites and fascicular calcite shrubs. In addition, the proposed scheme takes into account the relative contribution of depositional and early diagenetic components, sediment mineralogy and the degree of dissolution, as well as any reworking of in-situ sediment. Although developed for the database of Barra Velha Formation, we believe this scheme may have wider application in supporting systematic and consistent descriptions and interpretations of deposits from both Barra Velha Formation from other pre-salt areas and a range of comparable alkaline lake systems with similar facies. It is worth to mention that our area of study does not include all facies described in other areas, such as the microbial silicified boundstone in Kwanza Basin Saller et al., 2016 . As an example of the application of the new facies scheme, the occurrence of the various facies types is combined with the abundance of detrital grains and trace element variations to characterize metre-scale ideal cycles within the Barra Velha succession and to propose alternative process-based models of changes in the environment of deposition. The southern domain of the South Atlantic is composed of a number of extensive basins, which include the Santos and Campos basins offshore Brazil Fig. 1A and the Kwanza and Namibe basins offshore southwest Africa. These have been interpreted as resulting from two phases of extension during the pre-rift stage of South Atlantic opening in the Late Hauterivian Early Barremian. The succeeding rift phase in the later Barremian-Aptian lasted 5 6 My and was characterized by tilting of fault-blocks and growth strata in upper continental crust, followed by the development of a flexural and continuous sag basin Chaboureau et al., 2013 . The Santos Basin is located on the southeastern Brazilian margin, between the Campos Basin in the north and the Pelotas Basin in the south, east of the Brazilian states of Sa o Paulo and Rio de Janeiro Fig. 1B . It is one of the most extensive offshore brazilian basins, with an area of 352,000 km2, and a current water depth of up to 3,000 m. The main structural features are the Cabo Frio High to the northeast, the Floriano polis Platform to the southwest, the Santos hinge line to the west, which marks the external western limit of the salt Ariri Formation , and the Sa o Paulo plateau to the east. Our area of interest is located in region of the Santos Outer High in the central part of the Santos Basin Fig. 1C . Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al. 2017 performed a restoration from balanced cross-sections and concluded that this area of the Santos basin did not undergo structure inversion, which implies the actual structure high was also a palaeohigh throughout Barra Velha deposition. The basement of the Santos Basin is composed of Precambrian metamorphic rocks. Tholeiitic flood basalt formed during the early stages of rifting in the Lower Cretaceous Camburiu Formation , is the equivalent of the Cabiu nas Formation in the Campos Basin and it has been dated to 134 122 Ma Mizusaki et al., 1992 . The sediments of the Santos Basin Fig. 2 are divided into three super-sequences rift, postrift and drift Moreira et al., 2007 . The rift super-sequence is composed of continental siliciclastics, talc-stevensite ooids with interbedded lacustrine coquinas and organic-rich shales of the Pic arras and Itapema formations. This was followed by a post-rift super-sequence, comprising lacustrine carbonates and shales of the Barra Velha Formation, which is followed by evaporitic deposits of anhydride and halite, locally with more soluble salts such as carnallite, sylvite and tachyhydrite, forming the Ariri Formation. Three major unconformities are important for understanding the Barra Velha Formation the basal Pre-Alagoas Unconformity PAU at the top of the coquina deposits, an internal unconformity called the Intra-Alagoas Unconformity IAU , and the Salt Base Unconformity SBU that caps the formation Fig. 2 . Finally, the basin evolved into a passive-margin basin with an early drift supersequence represented by shallow-marine platform carbonates of the Guaruja Formation, followed by platform drowning and deeper-water sediments of the Itanhae m Formation. High-frequency basic ideal or elementary cycles, consisting of a regular repetition of facies, have been recognized in these lacustrine carbonates in the Santos and Campos basins Dias, 2005 Wright and Barnett, 2015 Muniz and Bosence, 2015 Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al., 2017 Arienti et al., 2018 Artaga o, 2018 Sartorato, 2018 Farias et al., 2019 Lima and De Ros, 2019 . The basic cycles are represented as having a thickness of 1 2 m, although examples range from 0.75 to 5 m. These cycles typically are comprised of mud-grade laminated carbonates, followed by units containing millimetre-diameter spherulites, and finally units dominated by millimetre centimetre calcitic crystal shrubs Wright and Barnett, 2015 . These authors interpreted mudstone-claystone-laminite facies to have formed in the relatively deep-water part of the lake. The shrubs formed on the floor of the lake, in many cases followed by subaerial exposure, and the generation of breccias, suggesting deposition in shallow water or during a period of shallowing. Whilst there is general agreement over the character of the proposed cycles, there is still intense debate about many aspects of these Barra Velha sediments. These include the biological or abiotic 2 Marine and Petroleum Geology 113 2020 104176 J.P. Gomes, et al. Fig. 1. Location of the Santos and Campos Basins, South Atlantic, offshore Brazil, with the white area representing the basin boundaries A . Area of interest within the region of the outer high of the Santos Basin B , with location of the wells examined C . Modified from Melo Garcia et al. 2012 . cores taken from the lower section Fig. 3 . Core was recovered from six wells, with extended core from two sites wells 3 and 2 spanning 197 m and 93 m respectively, whereas at the other sites core lengths were 30 m, 12 m, 30 m and 27 m Fig. 3 , totalizing 389 m of described core. For two wells 7 and 8 only sidewall cores are available. 778 sidewall cores and 1143 plugs were prepared from blue epoxy resin-impregnated samples. Samples were stained with Alizarin red-S and potassium ferricyanide solution to aid the identification of carbonate minerals as outlined by Dickson 1966 . All thinsections were examined by petrographic microscope and the relative abundance of components was determined for all samples. Quantitative petrography was performed on 10 representative thin-sections by counting 200 points per sample to evaluate the texture of the carbonate grains, and diagenetic constituents. The methodology used by Muniz and Bosence 2015 to interpret origin of most of the facies, whether the spherulites are primary or early diagenetic and the composition of the associated fine grains, some of which were subsequently dissolved organic matter related to extracellular polymeric substances or magnesium clay minerals . Our work and that of others Dias, 2005 Wright and Barnett, 2015 Muniz and Bosence, 2015 Arienti et al., 2018 Artaga o, 2018 Sartorato, 2018 Farias et al., 2019 Lima and De Ros, 2019 suggests that in fact there are other types of basic cycle with different facies associations. 3. Materials and methods This paper focuses on data from eight wells distributed along the horst structure of the Santos Outer High Fig. 1C . The cores available mostly come from the upper section of the Barra Velha Formation above the Intra-Alagoas Unconformity, with additional material from sidewall 3 Marine and Petroleum Geology 113 2020 104176 J.P. Gomes, et al. Fig. 2. Lower Cretaceous stratigraphic chart for the Santos Basin adapted from Moreira et al., 2007 and ostracod biozones modified from Pietzsch et al., 2018 . The present study focusses on the Barra Velha Formation, which is bounded by the Pre-Alagoas and Salt Base unconformities and separated into the Lower and Upper Barra Velha Formation by the Intra-Alagoas Unconformity. The Barra Vellha Formation was deposited during the Alagoas local stage, which is correlated to ostracod biozone 011 and broadly to the Aptian Moreira et al., 2007 . Fig. 3. Sample distribution within the Barra Velha Formation, which is 500 m thick in the studied area. Cores are available from the upper Barra Velha Formation of six out of 8 wells thick bars and sidewall cores from below dashed intervals . The numbers of thin sections of plugs from cores and sidewall cores are also shown, in which thin sections from sidewall cores from Lower and Barra Velha Formation are also represented below and above Intra-Alagoas unconformity. The gamma ray data are from Well 3 and are shown in API. BVF Barra Velha Formation, sw number of side wall cores, pl number of plugs. 4 Marine and Petroleum Geology 113 2020 104176 J.P. Gomes, et al. particles Fig. 5 . The main clay minerals present in the Barra Velha Formation are kerolite, stevensite, saponite, sepiolite, illite and mixedlayer minerals kerolite smectite and illite smectite Souza et al., 2018 Madrucci et al., 2019 . Spherulites The spherulites are spherical to sub-spherical calcite aggregates with radial extinction that commonly are dolomitized or recrystallized. Spherulites from ten thin sections were measured and range in diameter from 0.1 mm to 4 mm, with a mean of 1 mm 0.3 standard deviation, n 800 , and a mode of 0.6 mm Figs. 6c h and 7 . The low variance in their size distribution suggests the same process of formation for all spherulites. A notable exception is the small number of samples n 3 that show normal or inverse grading at the thin-section scale, suggesting a relationship between spherulite size and an ideal combination of water chemistry and hydrodynamic conditions. In some cases, it is possible to recognize nuclei composed of cryptocrystalline micrite, clay minerals and, more rarely, a fragment of ostracod. The calcitic fibro-radial texture is preserved in most of the samples, but chalcedonic and micro-quartz replacement locally results in the loss of original fabric. Some spherulites are asymmetric, with preferential growth in one particular direction. In most cases, spherulites tend to grow upwards, whereas in some layers the spherulites grow parallel to the bedding. Some grains are a mixture of a fascicular component similar to a shrub and yet show a fibro-radial texture characteristic of a spherulite. In these situations, the volumetrically dominant of the two textures is used to determine the component name. Shrubs The term shrub is applied in this study to the ray crystal crust defined by Folk et al. 1985 , emphasizing the morphological similarity to fascicular-optic calcite sensu Kendall, 1977 with a divergent optic-axis pattern within each crystal away from the substrate. Shrubs are composed of fibrous to extremely coarse bladed calcite crystals, with the long axis of their fan-shaped structure ranging from 0.15 to 6.5 mm in length. Some shrubs incorporate random fine detrital grains or, rarely, bioclasts within their structure. Within an individual layer, shrubs are oriented parallel to one another, varying from densely packed 0.2 mm between shrub central axes to widely spaced 4 mm spacing Fig. 6 a and b . In some samples it is possible to identify more than one growth phase, resulting in a composite shrub that extends up to 20 mm. The shrubs occur predominantly as horizontal layers and locally form low domal structures Terra et al., 2010 Wright and Barnett, 2015 Rezende and Pope, 2015 . the facies from Formation Image Logs FMI Log for the intervals without cores, was applied create a qualitative facies log based on the sidewall-core facies and differences in image texture. Wireline logs gamma ray especially and thin-sections from sidewall-core samples were used as additional data in order to determine and interpret the facies. Quantitative Evaluation of Minerals by SCANning electron microscopy QEMSCAN and X-Ray Diffraction XRD data were also obtained for different facies. Chemical and mineralogical maps of 10 representative thin-sections were produced using a QEMSCAN 650 automated mineralogical mapping instrument with accelerating voltage of 15 kV and 10 m spot size. The mineralogical maps show the spatial distribution of mineral phases and the relationship between them their abundance was quantified as area percentages or percentage of mass considering the theoretical density of minerals . Quantities lower than 0.01 were ignored. Chemical analysis was performed on 590 samples from Well 3 core samples using ICP-OES Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometry in order to determine the elemental abundance of Al2O3, Fe2O3, CaO, Cr2O3, K2O, MgO, MnO, Na2O, SiO2 and TiO2. Most analytical chemical data are of a closed form, where individual components are summed, yielding an identical total. As result, as some elements increase in relative abundance others must decrease. This aspect leads to correlation measures and graphical presentations that do not reflect the true underlying relationships. This constraint can be corrected before multivariate statistical analysis by making a centred log-ratio transformation CLR as described by Montero-Serrano et al. 2010 . The chemical data after CLR and the detrital grain abundance from XRD data were interpreted using Principal Component Analysis PCA to understand the correlation between these variables. Finally, vertical variations in facies, detrital content and elemental composition were used qualitatively to identify the basic cycles. 4. Facies classification The Barra Velha facies samples from the eight wells are dominated by variable amounts of three components that were formed in situ mud understood as fine-grained components microcrystalline calcite and clay minerals , calcite spherulites and fascicular-optic calcite shrubs. These have been described in previous studies of Pre-salt carbonates in the Santos and Campos basins, as well as from the Namibian and Kwanza basins. However, there is a lack of consensus as to the processes responsible for formation of some of these components. Here we describe the main component grains in our study area and propose a new facies classification. 4.2. Facies classification The triangular diagram Fig. 8 shows the proposed classification that encapsulates the range of combinations of the three main components where there is no evidence of significant reworking. The most abundant component gives a rock name, and the secondary component provides a qualifying adjective. Figs. 4 6 show thin-section examples of each facies type defined. In addition, an adjective for the main diagenetic event can be added, for example dolomitic spherulitestone Fig. 6 g and h , silicified spherulitestone or dissolved spherulitestone. In order to provide sufficient categories to differentiate rocks of significantly different composition, the classification triangle for in situ deposits Fig. 8 is subdivided into nine rock types. The percentage values selected for the boundaries are those that provide a convenient separation of common combinations described in cores and thin-sections. In the classification of an essentially continuous series, all divisions are arbitrary Folk, 1959 . The boundaries used in the proposed classification unavoidably reflect personal opinion, but it is suggested they coincide with a separation of components formed by different processes. The in situ carbonates comprising more than 90 of shrubs, spherulites or mud-rich end-members are designated shrubstone, spherulitestone and mudstone respectively Fig. 8 . The combination of more than 50 shrubs and less than 10 mud separates spherulitic shrubstone from shrubby spherulitestone. Rocks with more than 10 4.1. Description of main components Mud The fine-grained material in the Pre-salt carbonates, as matrix between grains and as beds, is broadly referred to as mud. This includes that comprised of clay minerals, calcite, dolomite and silica. Petrographically the clays occur as optically clear grains of clay aggregates, usually within beds which are massive or have a fine millimetric-scale lamination examples of these are shown in Fig. 4 . The clay minerals may show a degree of replacement by microcrystalline dolomite and microcrystalline silica. In other cases, the fine-grained sediment is micrite, which is mostly composed of calcite but may show a degree of replacement by dolomite and silica. Some of the dolomite silica could be primary, but likely formed via a metastable precursor. In general, the light cream to dark brown coloured sediments show a plane-parallel to smooth wavy lamination, with thicknesses varying from millimetres to centimetres examples of these are shown in Fig. 5 . Optical microscopy shows that the light laminae are composed of microcrystalline calcite and the dark bands are composed of microcrystalline and rhombohedral dolomite and organic matter. Some mud samples contain fine siliciclastic grains, ostracods and phosphatic 5 Marine and Petroleum Geology 113 2020 104176 J.P. Gomes, et al. Fig. 4. Facies classification a and b spherulitic shrubstone with mud, comprising calcite shrubs, calcite spherulites and Mg-clays locally replaced by dolomite c and d shrubby spherulitestone with mud, comprising fascicular calcite shrubs, calcite spherulites and Mg-clays e and f muddy spherulitestone, comprising calcite spherulites and Mg-clays g and h spherulitic mudstone, comprising calcite spherulites and Mg-clays i and j Mg-clay mudstone. All images pairs are PPL and XP and were impregnated with blue epoxy resin to highlight the porosity. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. thickness ranges from several cm up to 2 m. These facies can be classified using the Dunham 1962 scheme Figs. 9 and 10 . We suggest that where reworked components are dominant 50 then this terminology should be used, but where they represent 50 , then the facies descriptions based on in situ components are more appropriate. In the rare instances that include mud intraclasts 120 of 1921 thin-sections or volcanic fragments 17 of 1921 thin-sections additional qualifying adjectives can be added intraclastic and volcanoclastic respectively . The degree to which muddy facies are in situ or redeposited can be difficult to determine without reference to sedimentary structures, and hence the term mudstone is used for both. What can be more easily determined is the mineralogy of the mudstone facies, which can comprise silica, Mg-clay minerals, micrite and or dolomite. Where it is possible to determine the mineralogy, the terms siliceous mudstone, calci-mudstone, dolo-mudstone and Mg-clay mudstone can be used, with mixed mudstone indicating no one component is dominant 50 Fig. 10 . In addition, the adjective laminated can be added where it is possible to identify lamination. The introduction of the mud are divided according to the proportion of the two components. Spherulitic shrubstone with mud and shrubby spherulitestone with mud are divided by the 50 shrub content. A rock with less than 10 shrubs is divided according to mud and spherulite proportions into muddy spherulitestone if the proportion of spherulites is higher than 70 and spherulitic mudstone otherwise. The term mudstone is applied to all samples that comprise 90 fine-grained 64 m components. These components include Mg-clays, microcrystalline calcite, microcrystalline dolomite, and microcrystalline silica, and the nature of the fine-grained component can be specified by adding an adjective Mgclay, calcitic, dolomitic or siliceous mudstone . There is an intense debate about origin of each of these components in the Pre-salt, as discussed below, and thus the proposed classification scheme adopts a pragmatic approach to distinguish the facies as they occur are today. Sedimentary processes can fragment and transport the carbonate components that formed in situ, generating a new, reworked facies type. These reworked facies are composed of intraclasts fragments of shrubs and spherulites , with grain-size varying from fine to very coarse, moderate to poor sorting, and massive to cross-stratified units. Bed Fig. 5. a to c show dolo-mudstone where dolomite has replaced original calcite. Green arrow in c points to fine grain of detrital quartz d to f show calcimudstone. Orange arrow in d shows phosphate particle. Green arrow in f points to fine grain of detrital quartz. Red arrow in f points to a level where calcite is replaced by chalcedonic quartz. Samples b, c, e and f were stained with Alizarin red S. a, b, c and d are PPL and e and f are XP. Al images were impregnated with blue epoxy resin to highlight the porosity. 6 Marine and Petroleum Geology 113 2020 104176 J.P. Gomes, et al. Fig. 6. Facies classification a and b shrubstone, comprising fascicular-optic calcite crust with framework porosity c and d spherulitic shrubstone, comprising fascicular optic shrubs, calcite spherulites and microcrystalline dolomite with inter-particle porosity e and f shrubby spherulitestone, comprising fascicular optic shrubs, calcite spherulites and microcrystalline dolomite with inter-particle porosity g and h spherulitestone, comprising calcite spherulites and rhombohedral dolomite with inter-particle porosity. All image pairs are PPL and XP and were impregnated with blue epoxy resin to highlight the porosity. For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. mineralogical qualifier can be added before the word mud, such as spherulitestone with dolomitic calcitic siliceous mud in cases where this will help in the description. We thus propose a set of three triangular diagrams to cover all the facies recognized from the Barra Velha Formation Fig. 10 , separated into in-situ and reworked facies. Mudstone may be in situ or reworked, and this is further classified according to mineralogical composition. Travertine has been rarely described from the BVF Falcao, 2015 Souza et al., 2018 and for these accepted classification schemes Pentecost and Viles, 1994 Erthal et al., 2017 should be used. Some workers have described microbialites from the BVF, specially for Lula fingers and for such deposits classification schemes are available Riding, 2000 Terra et al., 2010 . The proposed classification is based on the textures identified in the present-day samples, with the objective of giving a clearer understanding of the facies distribution and linking this with reservoir quality. There are a number of ways in which this new facies classification scheme can be used. Here we illustrate its application to recognize facies cycles and implications for the processes generating elementary cycles. In addition, the classification scheme can provide a basis to examine the variations in diagenesis, vertically and laterally through the succession, as well as to compare the facies patterns with Fig. 7. Distribution of spherulite diameter measured in 563 spherulites from 10 thin-sections. The log-normal distribution has a mean value of 1 mm and standard deviation of 0.8 mm, and a mode of 0.6 mm. 7 Marine and Petroleum Geology 113 2020 104176 J.P. Gomes, et al. Fig. 8. Ternary diagram showing the facies classification for sediment generated in situ for the Barra Velha Formation. 5.2. Metre-scale application porosity and permeability measurements to provide a better understanding of reservoir characteristics and trends. The methodology proposed by Muniz and Bosence 2015 was applied to interpret the facies in the 8 wells as described above in the Materials and Methods section. Fig. 12 shows that there are differences in the distribution of facies between the upper and lower portion of the Barra Velha Formation, as well as between the wells drilled upon the palaeo-high and more basinward on the structure. The basal portion of Lower Barra Velha Formation is largely composed of Mg-clay-, calciand dolo-mudstone, and reworked facies, whereas the overlying portion is mostly formed by in situ facies with or without Mg-clay minerals. There is a marked increase in Mg-clay facies above the Intra Alagoas Unconformity. In the wells drilled off the main structure, Mg-clay minerals predominate, but decrease in abundance towards the top of the Upper Barra Velha Formation where in-situ facies lack Mg-clay minerals. The wells drilled upon the palaeo-high are composed of mudstone and reworked facies above the Intra Alagoas Unconformity, giving way upwards to a dominance of in-situ facies up to the Salt Base Unconformity, showing rare less than 0.1 facies with Mg-clay. Facies in the uppermost 15 m of the Upper Barra Velha Formation in all eight wells are distinct, with an increase of mudstone but a lack of Mgclay minerals, and evidence of microbial textures Lula s Fingers . Elsewhere, in an adjacent field within the Santos Basin, Artaga o 2018 interpreted this interval as postdating the basal unconformity, representing the lowermost part of the Ariri Formation. However, Tedeschi 2017 has shown an important change on strontium isotope values 87Sr 86Sr ratios at limit between the top of Lula s Fingers 0.712 and the base of the anhydride 0.709 in a cored section from Santos Basin. Therefore, it is likely that the main uniformity is at the base of the anhydride layer above the Lula s Fingers . 5. Application of facies classification to the Barra Velha formation 5.1. Thin-section scale application Fig. 11 shows an application of the proposed facies classification to the study area Fig. 1C , based on descriptions of 1921 thin-sections. Estimated proportions of different components were plotted for each sample on the ternary diagrams, differentiating data from the wells drilled on the palaeo-high and those located on the eastern side of the structure towards the deeper basin. Samples with 90 mud are plotted on ternary diagrams for both the in-situ and reworked facies A1 and C1 as it is not possible to unambiguously determine their origin, and they are further discriminated in the mudstone ternary diagram B1 . The in-situ facies Fig. 11 A1 to A3 show a higher proportion of Mgclay in the deeper wells, whereas wells drilled on the palaeo-high show a predominance of facies composed of spherulites and shrubs. For all samples with 90 spherulite shrubs and 90 mud, the finegrain fraction is exclusively comprised of Mg-clay. In contrast, the triangle for mudstone Fig. 11 B1 to B3 shows that most samples with 90 mud are composed of varying proportions of calcite and dolomite, with 5 of mudstone samples containing 10 Mg-clay minerals. The triangle for reworked facies Fig. 11 C1 to C3 shows a higher abundance of grainstone rudstone in samples from the wells drilled on the palaeo-high and of mudstone wackestone packstone from those drilled more basinward. Reworked facies are bimodal, tending towards either grain-supported 75 coarse grained or mudstone, with a relative paucity of packstone Fig. 11 C . 8 Marine and Petroleum Geology 113 2020 104176 J.P. Gomes, et al. Fig. 9. Classification for reworked facies a and b intraclastic rudstone with inter-particle porosity c and d intraclastic grainstone with inter-particle porosity e and f intraclastic packstone. All image pairs are PPL and XP. spaces. Considering the K-feldspar content as representative of detrital grain abundance, of all the proposed facies types those rich in mud have significantly higher median detrital content Fig. 15b . Most facies with a low mud content have a low median detrital content, but the subset of these samples with 0.5 vol detrital grains marked as outliers in Fig. 14b suggests that the detrital content increases with abundance of spherulites. Principal Component Analysis PCA was applied to interpret the geochemical and XRD data Wold et al., 1987 and estimate the correlation structure of the variables Fig. 16a , using the eigenvalues to evaluate the variation represented by each principal component Fig. 16b . There is a clear correlation between detrital grain abundance and the majority of trace elements at component 1 Al2O3, Fe2O3, TiO2, and K2O . Al, Fe and Ti are generally considered as elements that have a low mobility during weathering, transport and diagenesis Sugisaki et al., 1982 Yamamoto et al., 1986 Wintsch and Kvale, 1994 . This relationship therefore suggests that the detrital grains are a source of these chemical components. There are three additional components that exhibit a different behaviour. Component 2 is composed of MnO, 5.3. Bulk chemical data and detrital grain distribution Chemical analyses were undertaken to determine the extent to which the various proposed facies types can be distinguished on the basis of their chemical composition, and to identify any chemical variations within and between these facies Fig. 13 . As an example, Fig. 14a shows the bulk chemical distribution of Al2O3, Fe2O3, TiO2, and K2O relative to the proposed facies classification. In general, all samples have a low iron content 1.2 , but facies rich in Mg-clay have higher values when compared with mud-poor facies. Apart from the mud-poor facies, all facies have a similar mean value. However, the spherulitestone has the highest content of Fe2O3, but they are outliers values. Al2O3, TiO2 and K2O follow a similar interpretation regarding value abundance within facies. Detrital minerals Fig. 15 are present within the carbonate facies but their abundance is relatively low in general 7 . Most detrital minerals are silt to fine sand-size grains, and are comprised of K-feldspar, albite, quartz and mica. These detrital minerals can be incorporated within spherulites, shrubs and mud and they occur in pore 9 Marine and Petroleum Geology 113 2020 104176 J.P. Gomes, et al. Fig. 10. New classification scheme, comprising three triangular diagrams, proposed to describe all facies within the Barra Velha Formation. would have been dissolved. Laminated fine-grained muddy facies are suggested by Lima and De Ros 2019 to have been originally deposited as laminated clays, probably stevensite, and to have been extensively replaced by calcite, dolomite or quartz. They identified relics of the precursor clays, as well as organic matter and siliciclastic grains quartz, biotite and muscovite . Indeed, in some thin-sections, microcrystalline dolomite has clearly replaced Mg-clay minerals Lima and De Ros, 2019 , but in others, there is no evidence for this. In some thin-sections, microcrystalline calcite and microcrystalline dolomite occur together, suggesting replacement of calcite by dolomite. Dolomite is likely to have been precipitated via a metastable precursor. Microcrystalline calcite could be formed either within the depositional environment and or during very early diagenesis. Some authors Sartorato, 2018 Artaga o, 2018 Farias et al., 2019 interpreted these deposits as only forming during flood events, with an input of terrigenous siliciclastic material and dolomite crystals precipitated at the air-water and or chemocline interface Farias et al., 2019 it has been suggested they formed within extracellular polymeric substances EPS Sartorato, 2018 Artaga o, 2018 . Anyway, the presence of dolomite indicates the presence of Mg in the system, which could be derived from the EPS Mg2 ions being attracted there or derived from the Mg-clays. Although we cannot define which process is operating, it is important to consider microcrystalline dolomite in the classification of the Pre-salt rocks. Microcrystalline silica Fig. 5 is also a matter of discussion. In the study area it does not occur within microbial boundstone as described by Saller et al. 2016 nor are there any hydrothermal silica deposits, as described in the Pa o de Ac u car area of the Campos Basin Viera de Luca et al., 2017 similar to those in Lake Bogoria Kenya Rift Valley Renaut and Tiercelin, 1994 . However, silica nodules and layers alternating with mudstone are common. The silica could be derived from dissolution of Mg-clay minerals Lima and De Ros, 2019 Wright and Barnett, 2019 , resulting from a change in pore-water chemistry. There is also the possibility of silica derived from diatoms e. g., Renaut and Tiercelin, 1994 , but we have not found any evidence for this. Nevertheless, microcrystalline silica is an important fine-grained material NaO, P2O5 and CaO SiO2 forms component 3 unusually in this case Si appears to be independent of Al, suggesting that silica and Mg-clay minerals have other sources than detrital, which agrees with authigenic source in alkaline lakes , and the 4th component is composed of MgO and Cr2O3, in which this relationship is not common. However, the amount of Cr is close to the detection limit, which could induce to false correlation with other elements. 6. Discussion of the origin of the main facies components Mud The main clay minerals present in the Barra Velha Formation are Al-free Mg-silicate minerals Tosca and Wright, 2015 , formed and preserved in the sub-littoral zones. They do not occur in organic-rich profundal intervals, however, where Mg-clays would dissolve. Dissolution of the clays would have led to the release of significant amounts of sodium, silicon and magnesium into the lake or pore-water. The occurrence of syngenetic Mg-clay minerals in alkaline and saline lacustrine environments is well documented Millot, 1970 Darragi and Tardy, 1987 Calvo et al., 1999 . From laboratory experiments, the kinetic boundary for the precipitation of Mg-clay minerals in the absence of any bacterial influence has been determined Tosca and Wright, 2015 Tutolo and Tosca, 2018 . The identification of Mg-clay minerals in association with biofilms and microbial carbonate Bontognali et al., 2010 Perri et al., 2018 suggests that microbial activity could catalyze the precipitation of these minerals. Tosca and Wright 2015 suggested that biotic processes would depend more on the local bacterial distribution within the substrate where the clay minerals would have nucleated such that the Mg-clay distribution would be more heterogeneous. However, bacteria may be widely distributed in such environments and thus laterally extensive accumulations of Mg-clay minerals would be the likely product of both bioticallymediated precipitation and of precipitation driven by abiotic process, such as evaporation. Considering the discussion above, the presence of Mg-clay minerals suggests a low-energy, alkaline lacustrine environment higher-energy conditions would likely prevent clay deposition, removing them to quieter areas. In addition, preserved Mg-clay facies indicate little change in pore-water chemistry, otherwise the minerals 10 Marine and Petroleum Geology 113 2020 104176 J.P. Gomes, et al. Fig. 11. Application of the facies classification to 8 wells in the Barra Velha Formation for the study area shown in Fig. 1C, differentiating wells drilled on the palaeohigh red crosses and more basinward black circles . Ternary diagrams and pie charts show the distribution of in-situ facies A , mudstone components B and reworked facies C . For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article. 11 Marine and Petroleum Geology 113 2020 104176 J.P. Gomes, et al. Fig. 12. Cross-section showing facies distribution for the 8 wells and the three main unconformities within the Barra Velha Formation. The distribution of facies shows a predominance of Mg-clay at wells drilled more basin-ward, whereas in-situ carbonate facies occur in the wells drilled on the palaeo-high. BVF Barra Velha Formation, PAU Pre-Alagoas Unconformity, IAU Intra-Alagoas Unconformity, SBU Salt Base Unconformity. spherulitestone samples examined were formed in situ in the subsurface. 35 could have formed either in situ in the water column, at the lakebed or in the subsurface and may have been reworked later. Whilst the proposed new classification allows a grainstone reworked facies to be exclusively compose of spherulitic grains, in practice there is limited thin-section evidence allowing differentiation between such a reworked spherulitic grainstone and a spherulitestone that formed in-situ. Alternatively, spherulites that show interpenetration on compaction and an absence of inter-spherulite sediment could also be early diagenetic and formed within Mg-clay or microcrystalline calcite. However, if currents were strong, then any fine-grained components would have been removed from the site of spherulite precipitation by either hydrodynamic selection or dissolution of these components. In both cases that spherulites show interpenetration on compaction and an absence of inter-spherulite sediment, we suggest that they are referred as grains. Resulted from been formed on the interface sediment-water or been a product of hydrodynamic or chemical selection, they would be a grain Dunham, 1962 . In the course of their laboratory experiments, Mercedes-Marti n et al. 2016 discovered that spherulites were more likely to have formed extensively at the sediment-water interface in alkaline lakes that were rich in dissolved organic acids, suggesting that clay-gels were not required to form voluminous deposits of spherulitic grains. Rogerson et al. 2017 and Mercedes-Marti n et al. 2017 , examining deposits from the Lower Carboniferous East Kirkton Limestone, Scotland, demonstrated that the formation of spherulitic carbonates could be decoupled from the abundance of clay in alkaline lakes and concluded that microbial-solution interactions warrant further research. Indeed, Kirkham and Tucker 2018 suggested that permineralised bacteria or viruses , within the water or within the sediment, could provide the that potentially could provide information on changes in lake-water chemistry and or pore-water during diagenesis. Thus, in a pragmatic approach, we identify four types of mud Mg-clays, microcrystalline calcite, microcrystalline dolomite and microcrystalline silica. Their proportions as seen today are important in the classification of Pre-salt rocks and for the interpretation of pH and other environmental and or diagenetic conditions that prevailed during formation of the Barra Velha facies. Spherulites The majority of spherulites within our study occur within deformed Mg-clay-rich and calcitic mudstone, displacing the fine material, suggesting that the spherulites grew while the sediments were unconsolidated in a very early stage of burial. Such petrographic evidence has been interpreted to indicate that these spherulites formed within a matrix, either replacively Herlinger et al., 2017 Souza et al., 2018 Lima and De Ros, 2019 or displacively Wright and Barnett, 2015, 2019 , in the very shallow subsurface below the water-sediment interface. However, 35 of the 271 spherulitestone samples examinated show interpenetration of spherulites on compaction and an absence of interspherulite sediment. These features strongly support the interpretation that the cortical crystals did not grow displacively within sediment, but grew at the sediment-water interface Chafetz et al., 2018 . This could indicate that at least some of the Barra Velha Formation spherulites nucleated around clumps of bacteria in the water column and then settled to the bottom for continued cortical crystal growth. The spherulites may have rolled around at the sediment-water interface and grown incrementally via a mechanism similar to that proposed for other calcitic spherulites grown in alkaline lakes Mercedes-Marti n et al., 2017 . If currents were strong, then any clay would likely have been removed from the site of spherulite precipitation. 65 of 12 Marine and Petroleum Geology 113 2020 104176 J.P. Gomes, et al. Fig. 13. Distribution of elemental geochemistry. Box a and b are detailed in Figs. 14 and 19. The question of the role of biological factors in the initiation of calcite shrub precipitation or even to facilitate carbonate nucleation remains open. Ceraldi and Green 2017 suggested that shrubs are a microbial-influenced facies and may represent shallow-water deposition affected by wave base and, potentially, also the depth of the photic zone. This interpretation is supported by observations in the Kwanza basin Saller et al., 2016 , where the shrubs are interpreted to form positive topographic structures, similar to biotic reefs, in which growth is oriented towards the light. Alternatively, Farias et al. 2019 proposed a depositional model for the Barra Velha Formation, invoking similar processes to those in an evaporative basin based on criteria used by Lowenstein and Hardie 1985 in modern salt pans. The proposed model proposes an alternation of periods of flooding, which transforms the salt pan temporarily into a brackish lake, and subsequent periods when the basin is solely groundwater-fed and evaporative concentration leads to desiccation. The alternating layers of shrub, spherulite and mud in the BVF are proposed by Farias et al. 2019 to be the equivalent of alternating halite and mud layers that characterize salt pan deposits. The shrubs are thus interpreted to have been generated at the sediment-water interface during evaporative periods, implying that shrub formation reflects climatically-control lake-level oscillations. Calcitic spherulites are interpreted to form diagenetically within a Mg-clay below the saline pans. nuclei for spherulite growth, meaning that spherulite formation was initiated by microbial activity, but that the crystal growth itself is abiotic. Shrubs Shrubs are interpreted in this study to have formed by insitu growth upward from a substrate, suggesting a higher rate of precipitation at sites near the top of the shrubby layer where the advective supply of reactive ions is greater than closer to the substrate. Terra et al. 2010 suggested adopting the term stromatolite sensu Riding, 2000 . They described laminated deposits comprising layers of individual shrubs which branch as they grow upwards, forming convex structures. However, many authors Wright and Barnett, 2015 Herlinger et al., 2017 Souza et al., 2018 Lima and De Ros, 2019 Farias et al., 2019 described these deposits as some type of abiotic carbonate with morphometric similarities suggesting controlling processes comparable to those in travertine systems. These authors, however, noted the lack of features typical of travertine, such as cascades, pisoids, flow carbonates, vents and gas-bubble spheres Farias et al., 2019 . Our observations accord with those of previous studies suggesting rapid precipitation from highly saturated solutions Wright and Barnett, 2015 , changes in the lake water chemistry related to climate, abiotic precipitation related to CO2 loss by evaporation, magmatic CO2 input and hydrothermal activity Lima and De Ros, 2019 . This would thus support the conclusion that the use of the term stromatolite is inappropriate. 13 Marine and Petroleum Geology 113 2020 104176 J.P. Gomes, et al. Fig. 14. a Boxplots showing the distribution of a Al2O3, b Fe2O3,c K2O and d TiO2 within the described facies based on ICP analysis for samples from Well 3. e Boxplots showing the distribution of K-feldspar within the described facies based on XRD analysis for all wells. n number of samples. 14 Marine and Petroleum Geology 113 2020 104176 J.P. Gomes, et al. Fig. 15. a and b spherulitestone cemented by dolomite, chalcedonic and micro-quartz. Image pairs are PPL and XP. c QEMSCAN mineralogical map of all components and d showing distribution of K-feldspar. e petrographic image and f cathodoluminescence image of mudstone, with black arrow pointing to Kfeldspar. 7. Facies patterns and the ideal cycle in the Barra Velha formation responsible for forming each component. Adding the abundance of each component in the name facilitates the understanding of depositional and diagenetic environmental changes through time by considering the intermediate scenarios. This also allows for more detailed studies of cyclicity and depositional facies models. Prior to our proposed scheme there has been no generally accepted system of nomenclature to describe the complete range of facies and proportions of shrubs, spherulites and mud which form the Pre-salt carbonate rocks. Many published articles e.g. Wright and Barnett, 2015 Muniz and Bosence, 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2017 Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al., 2017 Arienti et al., 2018 Artaga o, 2018 Sartorato, 2018 Farias et al., 2019 Tanaka et al., 2018 Lima and De Ros, 2019 have simplified this complexity by choosing end-member components to name the facies, ignoring the gradation from one endmember to another. However, in the section discussing the origin of the main facies components it is shown that different processes could be 7.1. Scale-dependency of facies distribution The three main components, shrubs, spherulites and mud-size grains, may alternate in their occurrence on a cm scale in thin-sections Fig. 6 c to f or at a macro-scale in core Fig. 17 . To deal with this heterogeneity, the approach discussed by Liu et al. 2002 suggested interpreting at different scales for different purposes. Meso-scale 15 Marine and Petroleum Geology 113 2020 104176 J.P. Gomes, et al. Fig. 16. a Correlation circle map showing results from the most significant two dimensions identified by the PCA analysis which together represent 41.3 of the total variance , where the most highly correlated variables group together. Each component 1, 2, 3 and 4 follows a different pattern. b Scree plot showing the Eigenvalues quantification of variance according to the dimensions analyzed. In black the two dimensions plotted at a. Fig. 17. a Representative examples of facies at thin-section scale. b Core facies description with different examples of upscaling. c Facies up-scaled for elementary sequence scale. Names stromatolite and spherulite Terra et al., 2010 , fascicular calcite shrub and stevensite claystone with calcite spherulite Herlinger et al., 2017 Lima and De Ros, 2019 , shrubs and spherulites Farias et al., 2019 and boundstone Sartorato, 2018 . in core are compared with those derived from uniform spaced intervals 5 and 20 cm in Fig. 16 , and can be used to suggest an appropriate thickness to be considered for an unsupervised scheme. This classification scheme also recognizes systematic changes in the vertical distribution of facies classes that can be used as a basis for analysis of cyclicity. In contrast, a facies classification scheme that considers only the end-member components results in a sequence dominated almost exclusively by shrubs, which may be appropriate at the macro to mega scale but fails to adequately describe important variations at the scale of the elementary sequence. 10 100 s mm facies logging would be used for understanding the depositional and diagenetic processes, as discussed earlier in this article, whereas macro-scale 1 10 s m facies logging serves the purposes of analysis of facies and architectural elements. Mega-scale 10 s m facies logging would be used for identification of major reservoir units and for correlation between outcrops and wells, and also for interpreting major changes in the depositional system. The proposed facies classification is a powerful tool to transform the meso-scale occurrence of components to a higher-resolution scale with a minimum of information loss by recalculating the proportion of which components occur on the desired scale. The new facies classification allows an analysis of the vertical facies variation and horizontal correlation across the field with minimal loss of depositional and diagenetic information. Fig. 17a shows an example of heterogeneity at the meso scale mm-cm and presents different possibilities to upscale Fig. 17b to the macro-scale whilst preserving the identified heterogeneity. Units defined from bed partings observed 7.2. Facies stacking patterns within a basic cycle The stacking of facies commonly reveals a hierarchical pattern with the highest frequency-cycle being the basic cycle or elementary sequence sensu Strasser et al. 1999 , where facies repetition corresponds to the shortest recognizable rhythm of environmental change with a 16 Marine and Petroleum Geology 113 2020 104176 J.P. Gomes, et al. Fig. 18. Two models upward-increasing shrub and upward-increasing spherulite of facies stacking for elementary cycles in the Barra Velha Formation based on core descriptions and two types of cycle. a and c non-reservoir and b and d reservoir. shrub dominated at the base, with a gradual transition upward to spherulitestone and, in non-reservoir intervals, also mudstone Fig. 18 c and d . In this analysis the reworked facies, comprising 20 of the samples have not been included in the idealized basic cycles for in-situ sediment Fig. 19 , but they could be added to the cycles according to their occurrences. Supplementary data for Al2O3, Fe2O3, TiO2 and K2O from the wholerock chemical analysis were used to help characterize the basic cycles within the Barra Velha Formation in the study area. The vertical distribution of detrital grains Figs. 14b and 15 within an 8-m length of section representative of the Upper Barra Velha Formation is shown in Fig. 19. Within the basic cycles a higher proportion of detrital grains occurs in the mud-rich facies, as well as in the spherulite-rich facies. Using this compositional data for Well 3 the most complete record from core , and the direct association with facies stacking patterns, we characterize the thickness of basic cycles for all 6 cored wells in the study area. This analysis suggests a mean thickness of the basic cycle in the region of the palaeo-high of 1.6 0.8 m, n 200 , with a range from 0.3 to 4.8 m. In comparison, basic cycles from wells located more basin-ward, have a mean of 2.0 1.3 m n 35 and a range from 0.6 to 7.6 m. In addition, the cycles in these deeper wells are more mudrich, whereas the mud-poor type of cycle is more common in the upper part of the palaeo-high succession the reservoir interval . regional significance. Such basic cycles generally consist of one bed, or rarely two, as has been described in marine systems where both the sequence boundary and the maximum-flooding surface interval are highlighted by increased abundance of clays Pittet and Strasser, 1998 . However, there has been much discussion over the presence of hierarchical patterns in sedimentary sequences Pollitt et al., 2014 . Within the lacustrine system, cycles can be identified in both reservoir intervals that are mud-poor, and also in more mud-rich nonreservoir intervals, which have more than 10 clay and thus little porosity. In both types of interval, two possible patterns for facies stacking of the basic cycle can be suggested after upscaling to the macro-scale Fig. 18 . Several models for a basic cycle have already been proposed for the Barra Velha Formation and its equivalent in the Campos Basin Wright and Barnett, 2015 Muniz and Bosence, 2015 Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al., 2017 Arienti et al., 2018 Artaga o, 2018 Sartorato, 2018 Farias et al., 2019 Lima and De Ros, 2019 . These researchers all suggest a dominance of shrubs within the upper part of the basic cycle Fig. 17 a and b . This facies stacking pattern here termed Upward-increasing shrub pattern is composed in nonreservoir intervals of an upward transition from mudstone, to spherulitic mudstone, muddy spherulitestone, shrubby spherulitestone with mud and lastly to spherulitic shrubstone with mud. Where the abundance of mud is 10 within reservoir intervals the stacking pattern within a basic cycle generally consists of an increasing upward abundance of shrubs, from spherulitestone to shrubby spherulitestone, spherulitic shrubstone and finally to shrubstone. A key feature of the Upward-increasing shrub pattern is the irregular surface above the shrubstone, which represents the top of this ideal cycle and may or may not have been subaerially exposed. An alternative facies stacking pattern here termed the Upward-increasing spherulite pattern would be 7.3. Process-based models for the basic cycle The two alternative facies stacking patterns a and b - Fig. 18 suggested for a basic cycle within both reservoir and non-reservoir intervals can be interpreted using concepts derived from a traditional sequence stratigraphic approach for marine carbonate sediments based 17 Marine and Petroleum Geology 113 2020 104176 J.P. Gomes, et al. Fig. 19. Vertical distribution of major chemical components within the proposed facies classification for two 8 m thick intervals shown in a and b . PCA showed the association between increasing abundance of detrital grains, Al, Ti, Fe and K within spherulitestones. 1, 2, 3 and 4 are components following a different pattern. 2018 Sartorato, 2018 Ceraldi and Green 2017 Tanaka et al., 2018 Lima and De Ros, 2019 agree that they most likely formed in deeper water relative to the shrubs as in the facies stacking pattern of upwardincreasing shrub . According to this interpretation, the increase in detrital grain content within the spherulitic and or mud-rich facies would be associated with fluvial input during wetter periods. The presence of ostracods and fish bones may also reflect the freshening of the basin. In shallower areas of the lake there would likely have been winnowing of mud by wind-waves, and that mud may well have accumulated in the deeper-water areas. Such winnowing may have been more active during periods of higher lake level when the fetch would have increased. Alternatively, one might expect an increased supply of aeolian material during arid periods to be associated with precipitation of Mgclay in a more alkaline, shallow lake dominated by evaporation. This would imply that mud was precipitated preferentially during periods of low lake level and this may have provided a substrate within which spherulites could have grown as in the facies stacking pattern of upward-increasing spherulites . During wetter periods, with an associated reduction in supply of aeolian material, the input of fresh water would on changes in water depth. In lacustrine systems changes in facies may be linked to water depth via physical controls such as the depth of wave base, biological controls such as the photic zone depth and or chemical controls such as evaporative concentration. An alternative interpretation for these BVF lacustrine cycles is that changes in abundance of components are due to temporal variations in lake water chemistry independent of water-depth variations Mercedes-Marti n et al., 2019 . In line with this, Garcia-Ruiz 1998 suggested that growth of spherulites is favoured over that of shrubs under conditions of high pH 10 and dissolved SiO2 250 ppm. In this case, the facies variation could be interpreted in terms of a less alkaline to more alkaline trend instead of the traditional increase and decrease of accommodation space. As discussed above, there are a number of models for spherulite genesis. However, irrespective of whether the spherulites formed on the lake surface, or within the water column and then settling and growing on the lake floor or they are a product of early diagenesis within a clayrich sediment or gel, most authors Wright and Barnett, 2015 Muniz and Bosence, 2015 Wright and Barnett, 2017 Herlinger et al., 2017 Liechoscki de Paula Faria et al., 2017 Arienti et al., 2018 Artaga o, 18 Marine and Petroleum Geology 113 2020 104176 J.P. Gomes, et al. Fig. 20. Alternative conceptual models to explain temporal variations of detrital material within the Barra Velha Formation a Humid to arid climate, fluctuating lake-level model. b Semi-arid to arid climate, shallow-lake model. c Constant lake level controlled by spill point. Black arrows point at the stage of the model for the lake x-section. could give rise to both high-frequency, repetitive changes in detrital influx and facies variations without invoking a changing climate. Three possible interpretations are thus suggested Fig. 20 a, b and c incorporating not just the main components described but also considering the mechanism by which detrital grains were transported into the basin and the lake chemistry. 1 Humid to arid climate, fluctuating lake-level model. During a humid climate, assuming precipitation is higher than evaporation P E , one would expect an increase in fluvial detrital input associated with rising lake level, resulting in lakewater dilution and a fall in pH, leading to mud deposition. During an arid climate, assuming P E, there would be decrease in fluvial detrital input, associated with falling lake level, resulting in evaporative concentration and a rise in pH, leading to precipitation of Mg-clay with spherulites then shrubs. This interpretation is a modification of the Wright and Barnett 2015, 2017 model, incorporating the distribution of detrital grains. 2 Semi-arid to arid climate, shallow-lake model. Under a semi-arid climate, assuming P E, there would be decrease of aeolian detrital input dust and precipitation of calci dolo siliceous have diluted the lake, decreasing alkalinity. These conditions could have favoured the formation of shrubs during periods of rising high lake level, though this suggestion remains to be fully explored. Whilst fluctuation in lake level is one driver for changes in lake water chemistry, a scenario whereby lake level is constant, controlled by a spill-point, should also be considered. This would require the amount of water coming into the lake to be sufficient to maintain the lake level at the spill point. At times of high throughput of water, the detrital input would be elevated, but the short residence time of waters within the lake would limit the development of alkaline conditions. In addition, it is important to consider that many alkaline lakes are stratified, and changes, for instance in fluid throughput, could also drive variation in the depth of the chemocline, with a thicker epilimnion upper layer of fresher water during periods of higher detrital input. Finally, alternative drivers for the variation in detrital supply should be considered, for example reflecting tectonically determined geomorphological changes in the catchment, which may be decoupled from lake level. However, it is challenging to envisage a mechanism that 19 Marine and Petroleum Geology 113 2020 104176 J.P. Gomes, et al. analysis, Investigation, Writing - Original Draft, Writing Review Editing, Visualization. R.B. Bunevich. Validation, Investigation, Writing Review Editing. L.R. Tesdeschi Validation, Writing Review Editing. M.E. Tucker Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Writing Review Editing, Supervision. F.F Whitaker Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Writing Review Editing, Supervision. mud. During an arid climate, with P E and an increase in aeolian detrital input, and rising pH to a high level, one would expect precipitation of shrubs, spherulites, Mg-clay with spherulites growing therein. This interpretation is a modification of the Farias et al. 2019 model. 3 Constant lake level controlled by spill point. In this case, climate-induced changes in aeolian fluvial detrital input, pH and lake stratification, divorced from changes in lake level, would lead to sediment accumulation as in models a and b of Fig. 20. Regardless of the mechanism s controlling the environment of deposition, in common with other Pre-salt studies, our work suggests that there were particular phases of lake sedimentation during which the shrubs were formed and other phases when spherulites and Mg-clays were precipitated. Our work is novel in that it shows a link between facies and detrital content, at the scale of the basic cycle. Independent of which stacking facies pattern is supported Figs. 18 and 20 , the variation in thickness and facies within each basic cycle can be related to changes in accommodation and or water chemistry. This raises as to question of whether these basic cycles are organized into larger-scale cycles, or whether they reflect random processes, and to what extent any cycle stacking pattern might contribute to unravelling the processresponse system controlling sedimentation in the Pre-salt deposits. Application of the new facies classification scheme to address these questions will be the focus of a subsequent paper. Acknowledgments We acknowledge Petrobras Brazil for support and permission to publish this research. We thank Hilary Corlett for helping with PCA analysis and the important contributions of V. P. Wright, R. MercedesMarti n, an anonymous reviewer and Associate Editor T. Bover Arnal. Appendix A. Supplementary data Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2019.104176. References Arienti, L.M., Souza, R.S., Viana, S., Cuglieri, M.A., Silva, R.P., Tonietto, S.N., Paula, L., Gil, J.A., 2018. Facies Association, Depositional Systems, and Paleophysiografic Models of the Barra Velha Formation, Pre-salt Sequence Santos Basin, Brazil. AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition, Salt Lake City, Utah May 20 23. Artaga o, V.M., 2018. Ana lise estratigra fica de alta resoluc a o aplicada aos depo sitos da Formac a o Barra Velha, Bacia de Santos identificac a o, correlac a o e mecanismos de controle de ciclos sedimentares. Master thesis. UERJ, Brasil in Portuguese . Bontognali, T.R.R., Vasconcelos, C., Warthmann, R.J., Bernasconi, S.M., Dupraz, C., Strohmenger, C.J., Mckenzie, J.A., 2010. Dolomite formation within microbial mats in the coastal sabkha of Abu Dhabi United Arab Emirates . Sedimentology 57 3 , 824 844. https doi.org 10.1111 j.1365-3091.2009.01121.x. Calvo, J.P., Blanc-Valleron, M.M., Rodro A guez-Aranda, J.P., Rouchy, J.M., Sanz, M.E., 1999. Authigenic clay minerals in continental evaporitic environments. Int. Assoc. Sedimentol. Spec. Publ. 27, 129 151. Carminatti, M., Wolff, B., Gamboa, L., 2008. New exploratory frontiers in Brazil. In 19th World Petroleum Congress, vol. 19 Congress Paper, Madrid. Ceraldi, T.S., Green, D., 2017. Evolution of the South Atlantic lacustrine deposits in response to Early Cretaceous rifting, subsidence and lake hydrology. In Petroleum Geoscience of the West Africa Margin. Geological Society, London, vol. 438. Special Publications, pp. 77 98. https doi.org 10.1144 sp438.10. Chaboureau, A.C., Guillocheau, F., Robin, C., Rohais, S., Moulin, M., Aslanian, D., 2013. Paleogeographic evolution of the central segment of the South Atlantic during Early Cretaceous times Paleotopographic and geodynamic implications. Tectonophysics 604, 191 223. Chafetz, H.S., Barth, J., Cook, M., Guo, X., Zhou, J., 2018. Origins of carbonate spherulites implications for Brazilian Aptian Pre-Salt reservoir. Sediment. Geol. 365, 21 33. https doi.org 10.1016 j.sedgeo.2017.12.024. Darragi, F., Tardy, Y., 1987. Authigenic trioctahedral smectites controlling pH, alkalinity, silica and magnesium concentrations in alkaline lakes. Chem. Geol. 63 1 2 , 59 72. https doi.org 10.1016 0009-2541 87 90074-X. Dias, J.L., 2005. Tecto nica, estratigrafia e sedimentac a o no Andar Aptiano da margem leste brasileira. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 13, 7 25 in Portuguese . Dickson, G.W., 1966. An analysis of vendor selection systems and decisions. J. Purch. 1, 5 17. https doi.org 10.1111 j.1745-493X.1966.tb00818.x. Dunham, R.J., 1962. Classification of carbonate rocks according to depositional texture. In In HAM, W.E. Ed. , Classification of Carbonate Rocks, vol. 1. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir, Tulsa, pp. 108 122. Embry, A.F., Klovan, J.E., 1971. A late Devonian reef tract on northeastern Banks Island, NWT. Bull. Can. Petrol. Geol. 19 4 , 730 781. Erthal, M.M., Capezzuoli, E., Mancini, A., Claes, H., Soete, J., Swennen, R., 2017. Shrub morpho-types as indicator for the water flow energy Tivoli travertine case Central Italy . Sediment. Geol. 347, 79 99. Falcao, L.C., 2015. Estudo Faciolo gico de um interval aptiano do poc o SB-1 Bacia de Santos e sua comparac a o com travertinos quaterna rios de San Juan, Argentina. Master thesis. UFF in Portuguese . Farias, F.A., Szatmari, P., Bahniuk, A., Franc a, A.B., 2019. Evaporitic carbonates in the pre salt of Santos Basin genesis and tectonic implications. Mar. Pet. Geol. 105, 251 272. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2019.04.020. Folk, R.L., 1959. Practical petrographic classification of limestones. Bull. Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. 43 1 , 1 38. Folk, R.L., 1962. Spectral subdivision of limestones types. In In HAM, W.E. Ed. , Classification of Carbonate Rocks, vol. 1. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir, Tulsa, pp. 62 85. Folk, R.L., Chafetz, H.S., Tiezzi, P.A., 1985. Bizarre forms of depositional and diagenetic calcite in hot spring travertines, central Italy. In In Schneidermann, N., Harris, P.M. Eds. , Carbonate Cements. Soc. Econ. Paleontol. Mineral, vol. 36. Spec. Publ., pp. 349 369. 8. Conclusions Facies from the Barra Velha Formation in the Santos Basin consist of three main components - calcite spherulites, calcite shrubs and mud micrite and Mg-clays . A new facies classification is proposed based on the proportion of these components within the sediments. A ternary diagram has been produced with nine facies interpreted as formed in situ. An additional ternary diagram using Durham s classification grainstone, packstone, wackestone is retained for sediments dominated by reworked facies. In addition, mudstone facies are separated into four end-members, based on mineral composition, namely calcimudstone, dolo-mudstone, siliceous mudstone and Mg-clay mudstone. Mixed mineralogy mudstone are common. The advantage of the proposed classification when compared to end-member facies lies in the preservation of subtle changes in the abundance of components that may have been caused by depositional diagenetic environmental changes with possible impact on the processbased model or reservoir quality. In addition, it can be used at a range of scales and offers a means to recognize systematic changes in the vertical distribution of facies classes that can be used as a basis for analysis of cyclicity. Using this scheme we identify two alternative facies patterns within basic cycles in the Barra Velha Formation. The mud-rich facies stacking pattern the non-reservoir interval occurs mainly in deeper water areas around the palaeo-high, whereas the mud-poor facies stacking pattern is more common in the shallow-water areas the reservoir interval . Bulk chemical analysis is shown to be a valuable additional constraint on the identification of this basic cycle. Three potential process-based conceptual models that could account for observed patterns are considered. Formation of mudstone and spherulite-rich facies with higher detrital content could arise from 1. increased fluvial detrital input to a deeper lake during wetter periods 2. increased aeolian supply of detrital grains to a shallow lake during arid periods or 3. decoupling from lake level but linked to spill-point elevation and or lake stratification. Whereas in marine carbonate systems, facies variations may be interpreted largely in terms of accommodation, within alkaline lake systems the role of temporal fluctuations in lakewater chemistry may be equally or more important. Author statement J.P.B Gomes Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Formal 20 Marine and Petroleum Geology 113 2020 104176 J.P. Gomes, et al. Renaut, R.W., Tiercelin, J.J., 1994. Lake Bogoria, Kenya Rift Valley a sedimentological overview. In In Renaut, R.W., Last, W.M. Eds. , Sedimentology and Geochemistry of Modern and Ancient Saline Lakes, vol. 50. SEPM Spec. Publ., pp. 101 123. Rezende, M.F., Pope, M.C., 2015. Importance of depositional texture in pore characterization of subsalt microbialite carbonates, offshore Brazil. Geol. Soc., London, Spec. Pub 418 1 , 193 207. https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.2. Riding, R., 2000. Microbial carbonates the geological record of calcified bacterial-algal mats and biofilms. Sedimentology 47, 179 214. https doi.org 10.1046 j.13653091.2000.00003.x. Rogerson, M., Mercedes-Marti n, R., Brasier, A.T., McGill, R.A.R., Prior, T.J., Vonhof, H., Fellows, S.M., Reijmer, J.J.G., McClymont, E.L., Billing, I., Matthews, A., Pedley, M., 2017. Are spherulitic lacustrine carbonates an expression of large-scale mineral carbonation A case study from the East Kirkton Limestone, Scotland. Gondwana Res. 48, 101 109. https doi.org 10.1016 j.gr.2017.04.007. Saller, A., Rushton, S., Buambua, L., Inman, K., Mcneil, R., Dickson, J.A.D., 2016. Pre-Salt stratigraphy and depositional systems in the Kwanza Basin, offshore Angola. AAPG Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. Bull. 100, 1135 1164. https doi.org 10.1306 02111615216. Sartorato, A.C.L., 2018. Caracterizac a o faciolo gica, estratigra fica e diagene tica dos reservato rios carbona ticos da Formac a o Barra Velha, Bacia de Santos. Master thesis. UERJ, Brazil in portuguese . Souza, R.S., Arienti, L.M., Viana, S.M., Falcao, L.C., Cuglieri, M.A., Silva, R.P., Leite, C.O., Oliveira, V.C., Oliveira, D.M., Anjos, C., Amora, R., Carmo, I.D., Coelho, C.E., 2018. Petrology of the hydrothermal and evaporitic continental Cretaceous Aptian presalt carbonates and associated rocks, South Atlantic Santos basin, offshore Brazil. In AAPG ACE Annual Convention Exhibition, Salt Lake City, USA. Strasser, A., Pittet, B., Hillga rtner, H., Pasquier, J.B., 1999. Depositional sequences in shallow carbonate-dominated sedimentary systems concepts for a high-resolution analysis. Sediment. Geol. 128, 201 221. https doi.org 10.1016 S0037-0738 99 00070-6. Sugisaki, R., Yamamoto, K., Adachi, M., 1982. Triassic bedded cherts in central Japan are not pelagic. Nature London 298, 644 647. https doi.org 10.1038 298644a0. Tanaka, A.P., Faria, D.L.P., Gomes, J.P.B., Souza Jr., O.G., 2018. Geological characterization and modeling of an Aptian carbonate reservoir in the Santos basin, Brazil. In AAPG 2018 AAPG Annual Convention and Exhibition, Salt Lake City, Utah, May 20 23. Tedeschi, L.R., 2017. Doctor of Philosophy Thesis In Lower Cretaceous Climate Records and the Correlation Between Marine and Lacustrine Settings Europe and South America . University of Oxford. Terra, G.J.S., Spadini, A.R., Franca, A.B., Sombra, C.L., Zambonato, E.E., Juschaks, L.C.S., Arienti, L.M., Erthal, M.M., Blauth, M., Franco, M.P., Matsuda, N.S., Da Silva, N.G.C., Moretti Jr., P.A., D Avila, R.S.F., De Souza, R.S., Tonietto, S.N., Dos Anjos, S.M.C., Campinho, V.S., Winter, W.R., 2010. Classificac a o de rochas carbona ticas aplica vel a s bacias sedimentares brasileiras. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 18, 9 29 in Portuguese . Tosca, N.J., Wright, V.P., 2015. Diagenetic Pathways Linked to Labile Mg-Clays in Lacustrine Carbonate Reservoirs a Model for the Origin of Secondary Porosity in the Cretaceous Pre-salt Barra Velha Formation, Offshore Brazil, vol. 435 Geological Society, London, Special Publicationhttps doi.org 10.1144 SP435.1. Tutolo, B.M., Tosca, N.J., 2018. Experimental examination of the Mg-silicate-carbonate system at ambient temperature implications for alkaline chemical sedimentation and lacustrine carbonate formation. Geochem. Cosmochim. Acta 225, 80 101. https doi.org 10.1016 j.gca.2018.01.019. Viera de Luca, P.H., Matias, H., Carballo, J., 2017. Breaking barriers and paradigms in Pre-Salt exploration 562 the Pa o de Ac u car discovery, offshore Brazil . AAPG Mem. 113, 177 194. Walker, R.G., 1992. Facies, facies models and modern stratigraphic concepts. In Walker, R.G., James, N.P. Eds. , Facies Models Response to Sea Level Change. Geological Association of Canada, St. Johns, NF, pp. 1 14. Wintsch, R.P., Kvale, C.M., 1994. Differential mobility of elements in burial diagenesis of siliciclastic rocks. J. Sediment. Reservoir 64, 349 361. Wold, S., Esbensen, K., Geladi, P., 1987. Principal component analysis. Chemometr. Intell. Lab. Syst. 2, 37 52. Wright, V.P., 1992. A revised classification of limestones. Sediment. Geol. 76, 177 185. https doi.org 10.1016 0037-0738 92 90082-3. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2015. An abiotic model for the development of textures in some South Atlantic early Cretaceous lacustrine carbonates. In In Bosence, D.W.J., Gibbons, K.A., Le Heron, D.P., Morgan, W.A., Pritchard, T., Vining, B.A. Eds. , Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production, vol. 418 Geological Society, London, Special Publications. https doi. org 10.1144 SP418.3. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2017. Critically Evaluating the Current Depositional Models for the Pre-salt Barra Velha Formation. Offshore Brazil. AAPG Search and Discovery Article 51439. Wright, V.P., Barnett, A.J., 2019. The Textural Evolution and Ghost Matrices of the Cretaceous Barra Velha Formation Carbonates from the Santos Basin. offshore Brazil. Facies in press . Yamamoto, K., Sugisaki, R., Arai, F., 1986. Chemical aspects of alteration of acidic tuffs and their application to siliceous deposits. Chem. Geol. 55, 61 76. https doi.org 10.1016 0009-2541 86 90128-2. Herlinger, R.J., Zambonato, E.E., De Ros, L.F., 2017. Influence of diagenesis on the quality on the quality of lower Cretaceous Pre-Salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs from northern Campos Basin, offshore Brasil. J. Sediment. Res. 87, 1285 1313. https doi.org 10.2110 jsr.2017.70. Kendall, A., 1977. Fascicular-optic calcite a replacement of bundled acicular carbonate cements. J. Sediment. Petrol. 47, 1056 1062. Kirkham, A., Tucker, M.E., 2018. Thrombolites, spherulites and fibrous crusts Holkerian, Purbeckian, Aptian context, fabrics and origins. Sediment. Geol. 374, 69 84. https doi.org 10.1016 j.sedgeo.2018.07.002. Liechoscki de Paula Faria, D., Reis, A.T., Souza Junior, O.S., 2017. Three-dimensional stratigraphic-sedimentological forward modelling of an Aptian carbonate reservoir deposited during the sag stage in the Santos basin, Brazil. Mar. Pet. Geol. 88, 676 695. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo.2017.09.013. Lima, B.E., De Ros, L.F., 2019. Deposition, diagenetic and hydrothermal processes in the Aptian Pre-Salt lacustrine carbonate reservoirs of the northern Campos Basin, offshore Brazil. Sediment. Geol. 383, 55 81. https doi.org 10.1016 j.sedgeo.2019.01. 006. Liu, K., Paterson, L., Wong, P., Qi, D., 2002. A sedimentological approach to upscaling. Transp. Porous Media 46, 285 310. https doi.org 10.1023 A 101503111. Lowenstein, T.K., Hardie, L.A., 1985. Criteria for recognition of salt-pan evaporites. Sedimentology 32, 627 644. https doi.org 10.1111 j.1365-3091.1985.tb00478.x. Madrucci, V., Arau jo, C.C., Anjos, C.W.D., Spadini, A.R., 2019. Depositional paleoenvironment of authigenic magnesium clays in pre-salt of Santos Basin Brazil. In 16th International Meeting of Carbonate Sedimentologists, Bathurst Meeting Mallorca, pp. 152. Manuel Garci a Ruiz, J., 1998. Carbonate precipitation into alkaline silica-rich environments. Geology 26 9 , 843 846. https doi.org 10.1130 0091-7613 1998 026 3c0843 CPIASR 3e2.3.CO 2. Melo-Garcia, S.F., Letouzey, J., Rudkiewicz, J.L., Danderfer Filho, A., Lamotte, D.F., 2012. Structural modeling based on sequential restoration of gravitational salt deformation in the Santos Basin Brazil . Mar. Pet. Geol. 35, 337 353. https doi.org 10.1016 j. marpetgeo.2012.02.009. Mercedes-Marti n, R., Rogerson, M.R., Brasier, A.T., Vonhof, H.B., Prior, T.J., Fellows, S.M., Reijmer, J.J.G., Billing, I., Pedley, H.M., 2016. Growing spherulitic calcite grains in saline, hyperalkaline lakes experimental evaluation of the effects of Mgclays and organic acids. Sediment. Geol. 335, 93 102. https doi.org 10.1016 j. sedgeo.2016.02.008. Mercedes-Marti n, R., Brasier, A.T., Rogerson, M.R., Reijmer, J.J.G., Vonhof, H.B., Pedley, H.M., 2017. A depositional model for spherulitic carbonates associated with alkaline, volcanic lakes. Mar. Pet. Geol. 86, 168 191. https doi.org 10.1016 j.marpetgeo. 2017.05.032. Mercedes-Marti n, R., Ayora, C., Tritlla, J., Sa nchez-Roma n, M., 2019. The hydrochemical evolution of alkaline volcanic lakes a model to understand the South Atlantic Pre-salt mineral assemblages. Earth-Sci. Rev. 102938. https doi.org 10.1016 j.earscirev. 2019.102938. Millot, G., 1970. Geology of Clays. Springer-Verlag, Berlin 1970. 430 p. Mizusaki, A.M.P., Petrini, R., Bellieni, G., Comin-Chiaramonti, P., Dias, J., De Min, A., Piccirillo, E.M., 1992. Basalt magmatism along the passive continental margin of SE Brazil Campos Basin . Contrib. Mineral. Petrol. 111, 143 160. https doi.org 10. 1007 BF00348948. Montero-Serrano, J.C., Palarea-Albaladejo, J., Marti n-Ferna ndez, J.A., Marti nez-Santana, M., Gutie rrez-Marti n, J.V., 2010. Sedimentary chemofacies characterization by means of multivariate analysis. Sediment. Geol. 228, 218 228. https doi.org 10. 1016 j.sedgeo.2010.04.013. Moreira, J.L.P., Madeira, C.V., Gil, J.A., Machado, M.A.P., 2007. Bacia de Santos. Bol. Geociencias Petrobras 15, 531 549 in Portuguese . Muniz, M.C., Bosence, D.W.J., 2015. Pre-Salt microbialites from the Campos Basin offshore Brazil image log facies, facies model and cyclicity in lacustrine carbonates. In In Bosence, D.W.J., Gibbons, K.A., LeHeron, D.P., Morgan, W.A., Pritchard, T., Vining, B.A. Eds. , Microbial Carbonates in Space and Time Implications for Global Exploration and Production, vol. 418. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, pp. 221 242. https doi.org 10.1144 SP418.10. Perri, E., Tucker, M.E., Slowakiewicz, M., Whitaker, F., Bowen, L., Perrotta, I.D., 2018. Carbonate and silicate biomineralization in a hypersaline microbial mat Mesaieed sabkha, Qatar roles of bacteria, extracellular polymeric substances and viruses. Sedimentology 65, 1 33. https doi.org 10.1111 sed.12419. Pentecost, A., Viles, H., 1994. A review and reassessment of travertine classification. Journal Ge ographie Physique et Quaternaire 48, 305 314. https doi.org 10.7202 033011ar. Pietzsch, R., Oliveira, D.M., Tedeschi, L.R., Queiroz Neto, J.V., Figueiredo, M.F., Vazquez, J.C., Souza, R.S., 2018. Palaeohydrology of the Lower Cretaceous pre-salt lacustrine system, from rift to post-rift phase, Santos Basin, Brazil. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 507, 60 80. https doi.org 10.1016 j.palaeo.2018.06.043. Pittet, B., Strasser, A., 1998. Depositional sequences in deep-shelf environments formed through carbonate mud import from the shallow platform Late Oxfordian, German Swabian Alb and eastern Swiss Jura . Eclogae Geol. Helv. 91, 149 169. https doi. org 10.5169 seals-168414. Pollitt, D.A., Burgess, P.M., Wright, V.P., 2014. Investigating the occurrence of hierarchies of cyclicity in platform carbonates. Geol. Soc. Lond. Spec. Publ. 404, 123 150. https doi.org 10.1144 SP404.3. 21